Bihar Wood Based Industries Investment Promotion Policy
July 20th, 2021
Document Classification: KPMG Confidential
© 2018 KPMG, an Indian Registered Partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative (“KPMG International”), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved.
INDEX
Preamble
Vision
Objectives
Salient Features
Incentives
Institutional Support
Investor(s) / Applicants and Eligibility
Policy Implementation, Monitoring, and Grievance Redressal

1. Preamble
The Government of Bihar (GoB) aims to achieve 17% green cover in the state. This will be done by:
Providing a supply-side push to afforestation programs by improving the overall tree cover and timber availability.
Offering competitive prices to farmers to grow more trees on their farmland, thereby creating demand-side pull by promoting an efficient and integrated wood-based industry.
Bihar wood-based industries have licensed sawmills – 2272, veneer mills – 142, plywood industries, and several furniture-making units across 38 districts (mostly in the unorganized sector).

2. Vision
To encourage and promote wood-based industries and artisans in Bihar through technology upgradation, waste reduction, value addition, storage, skill upgradation, and export promotion, thereby generating higher income returns to entrepreneurs and farmers, skill upgradation of artisans, and creating more employment opportunities.

3. Objectives
The policy aims to achieve the following objectives for the overall growth and development of wood-based industries in the State with a goal of providing remunerative returns to the entrepreneurs and farmers:
3.1 Investment Promotion
To promote and facilitate investment in wood-based industries in Bihar through financial assistance and an enabling environment.
3.2 Technology and Skill Upgradation
To upgrade technology, reduce wastage, add value, provide storage, and promote exports, resulting in the overall development of the wood-based industry.
3.3 Financial Assistance
To extend financial assistance for establishing new wood-based industrial units, as well as for technology upgradation and expansion of existing units in the State.
3.4 Entrepreneurial Income
To enhance the income of entrepreneurs through better returns gained through waste reduction and value addition.
3.5 Employment Opportunities
To create employment opportunities through the promotion of wood-based industries.
3.6 Support for Farmers
To give remunerative prices to farmers for their tree crop timber and encourage them to plant and maintain trees on their farmland.
3.7 Artisans’ Skill Development
To upgrade the skill level of artisans and equip them with modern and efficient tools and equipment.
3.8 Support for Small Units
To support small furniture and other modern artifacts making units through modern tools and equipment.

4. Salient Features of Bihar Wood-Based Industries Investment Promotion Policy, 2020
4.1 Additional Benefits
Providing benefits for eligible investors in addition to the benefits under the Bihar Industrial Investment Promotion Policy (BIIPP), 2016. However, if the investor avails interest subvention under BIIPP 2016, then the sum of incentive under interest subvention and capital subsidy under this policy shall not exceed the monetary ceiling provided in this Policy.
4.2 Capital Subsidy
Providing capital subsidy to eligible individual investors/entrepreneurs for setting up/modernization/expansion/technological upgradation/diversification of wood-based industrial units in Bihar.
4.3 Subsidy Eligibility
Subsidy under this policy shall be allowed only:
For technology upgradation of existing tools, plants, and machinery of the existing wood-based industrial units in the state.
In case of expansion of existing units where the existing capacity of the said unit is enhanced by at least 25% by way of such expansion or modernization.
In case of diversification of an existing unit where the project cost of the diversified unit should be at least Rs 10 lakhs in plants, machinery, and civil construction for a new product line/activity.
For setting up new wood-based industries in the state.
4.4 Artisans' Benefits
Artisans working on wood-based products shall be eligible for skill upgradation, certification, and provision of tools and equipment.
4.5 Support for Small Units
Small furniture and artifact-making units employing not less than 10 labor shall be eligible for a one-time grant for modern tools and equipment.
4.6 Nodal Agency
DEFCC, Bihar will be the nodal agency for implementation and monitoring of this policy in the state.
4.7 Policy Duration
This policy will remain in operation till 31st March 2025.

5. Incentives under Bihar Wood-Based Industries Investment Promotion Policy, 2020
5.1 Guiding Principles
5.1.1 Applicability
These provisions/principles shall be applicable to all eligible units under this policy.
5.1.2 Subsidy Duration
Eligible units under the policy shall avail the subsidies for up to a maximum of 2 years after the end of the policy term, i.e., 31st March 2025.
5.1.3 Additional Benefits
The subsidy support will be in addition to the wide range of benefits eligible under BIIPP (Bihar Industrial Investment Promotion Policy) 2016. However, if the investor avails interest subvention under BIIPP 2016, then the sum of incentive under interest subvention and capital subsidy under this policy shall not exceed the monetary ceiling provided in this policy.
5.1.4 Application Deadline
An investor shall not be eligible for applying under this policy for availing capital subsidy beyond 31st March 2025.
5.1.5 Project Cost
For the purpose of calculation of capital subsidy under this policy, the approved project cost shall mean the project cost as approved by the competent authority. The approved project cost shall be the basis for determining the disbursal amount.
5.1.6 Additional Subsidy for SC/ST/EBC Investors
In case of SC/ST/EBC investors, the maximum limit of capital subsidy shall be increased by an additional 5% across all categories. However, the overall monetary ceiling of the subsidy shall remain the same.

5.2 Assistance under this Policy
The Policy aims to promote investment in wood-based Industry/units in the state through extending an additional support (apart from those enshrined in the BIIPP, 2016) for the individual investors as well as to create an enabling environment for promoting wood-based industries in Bihar.
5.2.1 Subsidy
Subsidy shall be made available to the investors as per the following details:
Category A: Existing Wood-Based Industrial Unit
Eligibility: Project cost must be a minimum of Rs 10 Lakhs.
Subsidy: The subsidy shall be 35% of the project cost subject to a maximum of Rs 70 Lakhs.
1st Installment: 50% (after purchase and installation of plant and machinery)
2nd Installment: 50% (after commencement of commercial production of the unit/project)
Scope of Project:
Expansion/diversification/modernization/technology upgradation of existing wood-based industry/unit to reduce wastage, waste utilization, quality improvement, value addition, and synergy.
Skilling and job creation.
Category B: New Integrated Wood-Based Industrial Units
Eligibility: Project must be approved by SIPB (State Investment Promotion Board) and the project cost must be a minimum of Rs 50 Lakhs.
Subsidy: The subsidy shall be 35% of the project cost subject to a maximum of Rs 175 Lakhs.
1st Installment: 50% (after purchase and installation of plant and machinery)
2nd Installment: 50% (after commencement of commercial production of the unit/project)
Scope of Project:
Set up new integrated wood-based industrial units.
Skilling and job creation.
Category C: Support to Small Furniture and Other Wood-Based Artifact Making Units Employing Not Less Than 10 Labor
Grant: Up to Rs 2,00,000/Unit for tools and equipment, including skill upgradation.
Scope of Project:
Quality improvement, waste reduction, and/or value addition using modern tools and equipment.
Skill upgradation.
Category D: Individual Artisans
Grant: Up to Rs. 50,000 per individual for modern tools and equipment, including skill upgradation.
Scope of Project:
Quality improvement, waste reduction, and/or value addition using modern tools and equipment.
Skill upgradation.
5.2.2 Dovetailing with Central and State Government Policies and Schemes
Dovetailing of incentives with the Central Government and State Government schemes will be permitted and they shall be over and above the proposed subsidy.

5.3 Special Incentive Package for Extremely Backward Classes, Scheduled Caste, and Scheduled Tribe Investors
5.3.1 Additional Subsidy
In order to promote EBC/SC/ST investors in the State, entrepreneurs under the said categories shall avail of a 5% additional subsidy under the policy. However, the overall monetary ceiling shall remain the same.
5.3.2 Other Benefits
Apart from the subsidy, entrepreneurs under EBC/SC/ST shall be given priority in terms of hand-holding, necessary government clearance, and pre- and post-implementation guidance.

6. Institutional Support
The policy intends to create an enabling ecosystem through institutional support to facilitate entrepreneurs/investors for investment, innovation, and entrepreneurship development.
6.1 Single Window System
DEFCC (Department of Environment, Forest, and Climate Change) shall facilitate in providing all necessary clearances and approvals through a single window system.
6.2 Nodal Agency
DEFCC will act as the nodal agency to monitor the progress of the implementation of the Policy.
6.3 Committees
Formation of an Empowered Committee chaired by the Principal Secretary, DEFCC, and a Steering Committee to review and monitor the implementation of the Policy.

7. Investor(s) / Applicants and Eligibility
7.1 General Eligibility
Any individual, company, firm, LLP, registered society, trust, or cooperative society with an interest in wood-based industries is eligible to apply under this policy.
The applicant must register under the Bihar Industrial Investment Promotion Policy (BIIPP), 2016 to be eligible for subsidies under this policy.
7.2 Specific Eligibility for Categories
Specific eligibility criteria for each category of subsidy are mentioned in Section 5.2.
8. Policy Implementation, Monitoring, and Grievance Redressal
8.1. Policy Implementation
8.1.1. Nodal Agency
The Department of Environment, Forest, and Climate Change (DEFCC), Government of Bihar, shall be the nodal agency responsible for implementing this policy in the State.
8.1.2. Project Monitoring Committee (PMC)
The Department shall constitute a Project Monitoring Committee (PMC) to scrutinize proposals received and provide clearances for the release of capital subsidies under this policy to the applicant investors.
8.1.3. Category B Proposals
For proposals under Category B, the application shall be considered after the investor’s project/unit attains approval from the State Investment Promotion Board (SIPB). The PMC, constituted under this policy, shall undertake subsidy sanction and disbursal decisions based on the applicant’s eligibility as per the policy's conditions. The decision taken by the PMC shall be communicated to the Industries Department and the investor(s).
8.1.4. Technical Support Group (TSG)
DEFCC shall place a Technical Support Group (TSG) to facilitate investors under this policy and support PMC in scrutinizing proposals, subsidy calculation, and disbursal as per the policy's provisions.
8.1.5. Detailed Guidelines
DEFCC shall issue detailed guidelines for implementing this policy and processing subsidy claims.

8.2. Policy Monitoring and Grievance Redressal
8.2.1. Review and Facilitation
The implementation of the policy will be reviewed periodically, and necessary facilitation and course corrections will be undertaken as needed to achieve the objectives of this policy. The PMC, with support from the TSG, shall undertake the implementation and monitoring of sanctioned projects/units and facilitate grievance redressal.
8.2.2. Investor Promotion Facilitation Desk
A 'Wood-Based Industries Investor Promotion Facilitation Desk' shall be established in DEFCC to provide handholding support to investors at various stages of application/clearances from concerned authorities and liaising with related agencies as part of the Government's effort to ensure Ease of Doing Business (EoDB).
8.2.3. Grievance Redressal Mechanism
The department will set up a grievance redressal mechanism to address issues faced by investors.

8.3. General Conditions
8.3.1. False Declarations
If any false declaration is given for the purpose of availing incentives, or if incentives are availed for a unit that was not eligible or any violation of the conditions of this policy occurs, the amount of capital subsidy is liable to be recovered from the date of availing such benefit along with interest compounded annually at 18% per annum. In case of non-payment within the stipulated time, the State Government may recover such amounts, including interest, as arrears of land revenue.
8.3.2. Interpretation Consistency
Any term not defined or mentioned in this policy will have the same meaning as given in the Bihar Industrial Investment Promotion Policy (BIIPP), 2016, for all purposes.
8.3.3. Policy Definitions
The definitions given in this policy and those provided in BIIPP 2016 shall be treated as part of this policy.
8.3.4. Policy Duration
This policy will come into effect from the date of issue of this notification and will remain in operation till 31st March 2025.

THANK YOU

