Bihar Wood-Based Industries Investment Promotion Guidelines
July 20th, 2021
Document Classification: KPMG Confidential
© 2018 KPMG, an Indian Registered Partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative (“KPMG International”), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved.
INDEX
1. Introduction
2. Listing of Machines & Equipment
3. Who Can Apply?
4. Eligibility
5. Responsibilities of the Investor/Applicant of Category A and B
6. When to Apply
7. Obtaining Application
8. How to Apply
9. Beneficiary Selection
10. Budget
11. Integrated Clearance System
12. Timeline for Processing
13. Timeline for Investor
14. Processing and Monitoring of Application Forms
15. Measures to Simplify Process and Procedures
16. Fees for Processing Applications
17. Technical Support Group (TSG)
18. Project Management Committee (PMC)
19. Financial Incentives and Eligible Units
20. Dovetailing with Central and State Government Policies and Guidelines
21. Special Incentive Package for Extremely Backward Classes, Scheduled Castes, and Scheduled Tribe Investors
22. Special Incentive Package for Women, Differently Abled Persons, War Widows, Acid Attack Victims, and Third Gender Investors
23. Budget
24. Procurement of Machinery/Equipment
25. Training and Capacity Building
26. Roles and Responsibility
27. Project Management Committee
28. Technical Support Group and Nodal Officer
29. Divisional Forest Officer (DFO)
30. Project Cost
31. Branding
32. Market Development
33. Grievance / Appeal
34. Facilitation Desk
35. Penalty
36. Miscellaneous

1. Introduction
The Bihar Wood-Based Industries Promotion Policy, 2020 was notified vide Resolution No. 2/Van Vividh-16/2018 2335 dated 26/08/2020.
Bihar has a total of:
2272 Licensed Sawmills
279 Veneer Mills
142 Plywood Industries
Several Furniture Making Units in the 38 districts.
This Guideline will help to bring in investment and create a positive business ecosystem to improve the existing sawmills, veneer, and plywood units as well as furniture units.
The Guideline supports:
Expansion
Diversification
Modernization
Technology Upgradation
Adding furniture making units
Value addition in Existing Industry/Unit
Additionally, the guidelines support the existing small furniture and other modern artifacts making units in the unorganized sector and artisans. This sector has immense scope for job creation for skilled and semi-skilled labor.
2. Listing of Machines and Equipment
2.1 A list of machines and equipment will be prepared, and cost norms shall be worked out for sawmill, plywood units, veneer mills, furniture making units, artisans, etc. The list can be added, updated, and upgraded as per the need and challenges of the sector to keep pace with the technology. The project proposing machines other than the listed machines and equipment shall be scrutinized by the TSG for the purpose and rate and shall be sent to PMC for approval.
2.2 List of Machines/Equipment required for Sawmill units - Annexure I
2.3 List of Machines/Equipment required for Veneer Mill units - Annexure II
2.4 List of Machines/Equipment required for Plywood units - Annexure III
2.5 List of Machines/Equipment required for Furniture making units - Annexure IVA
2.6 List of Machines/Equipment required for Modern Furniture making unit - Annexure IVB
2.7 List of Machines/Equipment required for Artisans units - Annexure V
2.8 Bamboo/Cane/Paper and other wood-based - Annexure VI
3. Who Can Apply?
New Investors
Entrepreneurs
Existing Wood-Based units
Artisans
Local Furniture making units
Bamboo products making units
The investors may apply as proprietorship, partnership, LLP, trust or societies registered under the relevant act, company, etc.
4. Eligibility
4.1 Investors for Category A and B
4.1.1 The applicant should have a sound financial background. The net worth of the applicant(s) should not be less than the subsidy amount sought.
4.1.2 The land for the project, if any, shall be arranged by the applicant either by purchase or on lease of at least 30 years and it should be registered in the name of the proposing unit.
4.1.3 Any investor/applicant who has availed financial assistance for a project under this policy of the Government of Bihar shall not be eligible to apply for another project under the same policy until one month after operationalization of the earlier project.
4.1.4 The proposals will be considered eligible subject to the fulfillment of conditions prescribed in the guidelines. The proposals will be selected:
Firstly, by merit. This would be based on different factors, inter alia, innovation, employment generation, amount of investment, uniqueness of the project in Bihar, use of local resources, etc.
Secondly, by date of complete application, subject to the availability of budget till the time the number of projects as per the annual targets gets exhausted.
4.2 Artisans for Category C and D
4.2.1 The skilled, semi-skilled artisans support to small furniture and other wood-based artifact making units employing not less than 10 laborers of local furniture making units.
4.2.2 Artisans who are domicile of Bihar involved in wood-based works.
5. Responsibilities of the Investor/Applicant of Category A and B
5.1 Read all the policy-related documents and details carefully and submit the applications as per the requisite guidelines.
5.2 Formulate the Detailed Project Report (DPR) and ensure timely execution of the project as per the submitted schedule of implementation in the application format.
5.3 Ensure timely and judicious end-usage (as applied and approved) of the finance and grant procured for the project.
5.4 Obtain statutory approvals/clearances including environmental clearances, which are prerequisites for commencement and operation of the Project.
5.5 Achieve financial closure and ensure timely completion of the project in specified timelines.
5.6 Own and maintain the enabling infrastructure.
5.7 Maintain proper accounts of the project implementation and the maintenance of infrastructure and facilities after commissioning of the project. The investor shall submit an annual report about the functioning of the project along with a copy of the audited accounts up to 5 years from the date of commissioning of the project.
5.8 Report to the Department about the timely progress of the project (Submit due progress report with pictures/photographs of the site) and facilitate monitoring and inspection as and when required.
5.9 The selected investor will adhere to all the terms and conditions signed in the agreement with the Department of Environment, Forest, and Climate Change, Government of Bihar.
6. When to Apply
6.1 The application window will be open on a rolling basis, and the proposals will be considered as per the timeline for the submission and availability of the budget.
6.2 The applicant must apply before starting the project and must obtain prior approval as per the guidelines.
7. Obtaining Application
7.1 Application forms for projects under this scheme can be obtained from the office of the Department of Environment, Forest, and Climate Change, Government of Bihar, or downloaded from the official website.
7.2 The application should be submitted in the prescribed format as mentioned in the guidelines along with the required documents.
8. How to Apply
8.1 The application in the prescribed format should be submitted along with the Detailed Project Report (DPR), proof of ownership/lease of land, and other required documents.
8.2 The applications should be submitted to the Department of Environment, Forest, and Climate Change, Government of Bihar.
9. Beneficiary Selection
9.1 The selection of beneficiaries will be based on merit and the eligibility criteria outlined in the guidelines.
9.2 The selection process will be transparent, and the list of selected beneficiaries will be published on the official website of the Department.
10. Budget
10.1 The budget for the scheme will be allocated annually by the Government of Bihar.
10.2 The financial assistance will be provided based on the approved budget and the availability of funds.
11. Integrated Clearance System
11.1 The Department will implement an integrated clearance system to streamline the approval process for the projects.
11.2 The system will facilitate faster approvals and reduce the processing time.
12. Timeline for Processing
A dedicated system shall be provided for the purpose of clearance and approval to investment proposals. The clearances will be provided in four stages:
12.1 Stage I: Technical Scrutiny by TSG
12.1.1 In case of any deficiency in the application, demand for documents/additional information shall be raised within 7 working days.
12.1.2 After receipt of a complete application, the scrutiny by TSG shall be done within 15 working days and shall be forwarded online to the Divisional Forest Officer (DFO).
12.1.3 DFO shall submit comments/feedback/recommendation online within 10 working days.
12.1.4 The proposal shall be forwarded online for consideration of the Project Management Committee (PMC) within 7 working days of receipt of the DFO report.
12.2 Stage II: In-Principle Approval by PMC
12.2.1 In-principle approval will be provided by the PMC within 30 days after the completion of Stage I.
12.3 Stage III: Verification by TSG/DFO
12.3.1 Desk scrutiny by TSG within 7 working days after receipt of a request for the release of the first or second tranche of subsidy.
12.3.2 Field verification and submission of a report by DFO within 10 working days after receipt of the forwarded request from TSG.
12.4 Stage IV: Disbursal of Financial Assistance
12.4.1 Financial assistance will be disbursed within 7 working days of completion of Stage III and forwarding of the request to the Nodal Officer, subject to the availability of the budget, provided there is no change in the approved project/quantum of subsidy.
12.4.2 If a revised consideration is required by PMC after completion of Stage III, PMC shall make the decision within 30 days, and the release of funds as per PMC's decision shall be done by the Nodal Officer within 7 working days of communication, subject to the availability of funds.
13. Timeline for Investor
13.1 For Category A and B, the timeline for installation of machines/equipment/civil work, etc., and making the unit operational is 18 months from the date of communication of in-principle approval (Stage II), extendable up to a maximum of 6 months in case of reasons beyond the investor's control.
13.2 The extension of the period up to 6 months shall be permitted by PMC after scrutiny of the investor’s request by TSG/DFO.
13.3 Machines and equipment/other structures shall be available for inspection up to 5 years from the date of release of the 2nd installment of subsidy.
13.4 Inspections can be conducted by the Nodal Officer or any forest officer not below the rank of Assistant Conservator of Forest (ACF).
13.5 Detailed instructions regarding the periodicity and scope of inspections shall be issued by the PMC.
14. Processing and Monitoring of Application Forms
14.1 An online system shall be put in place for submission/processing/monitoring/disposal of application forms and all subsequent processes.
14.2 The Nodal Officer shall be responsible for regular monitoring of the processing of applications/requests to ensure that the timelines are adhered to at all stages.
14.3 The Nodal Officer shall be authorized for communication of in-principle approval as well as for subsequent permissions and release of funds.
15. Measures to Simplify Process and Procedures
15.1 The PMC can simplify the procedures, process, inspections, fund release, monitoring, verifications, etc., for speedy project approvals and execution.
15.2 Rationalization of inspections for clearances - A joint inspection by all competent authorities shall be encouraged for clearances that require inspection.
16. Fees for Processing Applications
16.1 Non-refundable application fees shall be collected from the applicant by the Department.
16.2 The quantum of application fees will be decided by PMC from time to time.
17. Technical Support Group (TSG)

Expert Composition:
Team Leader: 1
Machines/Equipment Expert: 1
Wood-Based Industry Expert: 1
Finance Expert: 1
Role:
Facilitate investor applications under the guidelines.
Support the Project Management Committee (PMC) with bringing in and assisting investors, scrutinizing proposals, calculating and disbursing subsidies, and monitoring execution.
Selection:
The TSG will be selected through a competitive bidding process where consulting agencies provide technical manpower.

Project Management Committee (PMC)
Composition:
Chairman: ACS/Principal Secretary/Secretary (DEFCC)
Members:
Principal Chief Conservator of Forest (HOFF)
Principal Chief Conservator of Forest (Dev)
One PCCF/APCCF level officer (nominated by ACS/Principal Secretary/Secretary DEFCC)
Representative of Department of Finance (not below the rank of Joint Secretary)
Representative of Department of Industries (not below the rank of Joint Secretary)
Nodal Officer (DEFCC) (not below the rank of Conservator of Forest, to be notified by the Department)
Special Invitees:
RCCF, CF, and DFO of the concerned region/district
Role:
Approve proposals.
Provide clearances for capital subsidy releases.

Financial Incentives and Eligible Units
Category A: Existing Wood-Based Industrial Units
Subsidy: 35% of project cost, up to Rs 70 Lakhs.
Installments:
1st Installment: 50% (after purchase and installation of plant and machinery)
2nd Installment: 50% (after commencement of commercial production)
Scope:
Expansion, diversification, modernization, technology upgradation.
Skilling and job creation.
Category B: New Integrated Wood-Based Industrial Units
Subsidy: 35% of project cost, up to Rs 175 Lakhs.
Installments:
1st Installment: 50% (after purchase and installation of plant and machinery)
2nd Installment: 50% (after commencement of commercial production)
Scope:
Setting up new integrated units.
Skilling and job creation.
Category C: Small Furniture and Other Wood-Based Artifact Making Units
Grant: Up to Rs 2,00,000/unit for tools and equipment, including skill upgradation.
Scope:
Quality improvement, waste reduction, value addition.
Skill upgradation.
Category D: Individual Artisans
Grant: Up to Rs 50,000 per individual for modern tools and equipment, including skill upgradation.
Scope:
Quality improvement, waste reduction, value addition.
Skill upgradation.
Notes:
Cost norms for tools, plant, and machinery are detailed in the annexures.
Units under Category A or B wishing to avail incentives under BIPP 2016 should follow procedures for the release of the second installment.

Dovetailing with Central and State Government Policies
Incentives:
Incentives from central and state guidelines will be over and above the proposed subsidy.
Total incentives including interest subvention under Bihar Industrial Investment Promotion Policy, 2016, and capital subsidy under Bihar Wood Based Industries Investment Promotion Policy, 2020, must not exceed the specified ceiling.
Special Incentive Packages
For EBC/SC/ST Investors:
Additional 5% subsidy.
For Women, Differently Abled, War Widows, Acid Attack Victims, and Third Gender Investors:
Additional 5% subsidy.
Note:
An applicant can avail of only one special incentive package.

Budget and Procurement
Annual Action Plan (AAP):
Prepared by TSG under the nodal officer's supervision.
Separate earmarking for Category C and D, and special categories.
Targeted beneficiaries and organized Melas cum Training sessions.
Procurement:
Beneficiaries can procure any brand as per choice, but subsidy will be limited to cost norms.

Training and Capacity Building
Training Components:
Prepared by TSG as part of AAP.
Partnerships with industry, institutions, and skill councils.
Maximum allocation for training and capacity building: Category C – INR 20,000; Category D – INR 5,000.
Demonstrations:
Manufacturers may be engaged for machine demonstrations.
TSG will oversee and document demonstrations.
Note:
Additional expenditure for training exceeding the ceiling will be covered by the AAP budget.

Roles and Responsibilities
DEFCC:
Nodal department for implementation.
PMC:
Oversee operational guidelines.
Provide direction and guidance.
Monitor progress and performance.
Decide on application fees.
Meetings:
At least once a month, as needed.
26. Roles and Responsibilities
DEFCC: The nodal department for the implementation of these guidelines.
Roles and Responsibilities of PMC, TSG, and DFO are outlined below:

27. Project Management Committee (PMC)
27.1. Overall Oversight:
Oversee all activities of the operational guidelines to achieve targets related to investment, technology penetration, upgradation, upskilling, and project execution.
27.2. Direction and Guidance:
Provide overall direction and guidance for the implementation of the guidelines.
27.3. Monitoring and Review:
Monitor and review the progress and performance of the guidelines.
27.4. Application Fees:
Decide on the quantum of application fees as needed.
27.5. Meetings:
The PMC will meet as needed, but at least once a month, if possible.

28. Technical Support Group (TSG) and Nodal Officer
Technical Support Group (TSG):
28.1. Support to PMC:
Provide necessary support to PMC and work under the day-to-day supervision of the Nodal Officer.
28.2. Planning and Implementation:
Assist in planning, hand-holding investors, scrutinizing proposals, implementing, monitoring, and evaluating various interventions and provide feedback reports to the Nodal Officer.
28.3. Annual Action Plan:
Prepare the State-level Annual Action Plan in alignment with guideline goals and objectives, considering the tentative outlay communicated by the State Government at the beginning of the financial year (March-April).
28.4. Cost Comparisons:
Compare tentative costs provided by applicants with the cost norms/patterns of financial assistance in the guidelines and make observations/recommendations. For components not covered in the guidelines, explore market prices and make recommendations.
28.5. Subject Matter Specialists:
Utilize services of Subject Matter Specialists from State Government and other institutes, if needed, through the Nodal Officer.
28.6. Functional Linkages:
Ensure smooth functional linkages among different stakeholders.
28.7. Machine and Equipment Lists:
Maintain and update lists of machines/equipment/tools with technical specifications, details of manufacturers, dealers, and market prices based on market studies and industry visits.
28.8. Workshops and Training:
Compile materials and conduct workshops, seminars, and training programs for all stakeholders with industry support.
28.9. Reports:
Prepare physical and financial reports on a monthly basis on beneficiary selection and release of financial assistance.
28.10. Application Scrutiny: - Scrutinize online applications for completeness, eligibility, and genuineness, classifying by sector, investment, feasibility, and other parameters. After vetting, forward applications to the DFO for comments/feedback/recommendation.
28.11. Stage III Fund Release Request: - Desk scrutinize requests for the release of funds after plant and machinery installation and forward to DFO for physical verification. Upon completion of scrutiny, forward to Nodal Officer for release of the first installment.
28.12. Second Installment Request: - Process requests for the second installment after commencement of commercial production similarly to the first installment process.
28.13. Changes and Adverse Findings: - If there are changes or adverse findings, forward requests to PMC for decision on fund release.
28.14. Agenda Preparation: - Prepare the agenda for PMC meetings under the supervision of the Nodal Officer.

29. Divisional Forest Officer (DFO)
29.1. Field Verification:
Conduct timely field verification of projects and submit comments/feedback/recommendations as per Stage I, Stage III, and Stage IV.
29.2. Project Monitoring:
Monitor implementation of projects and utilization of financial assistance.
29.3. Periodic Inspection:
Conduct periodic inspections of projects after operationalization for up to 5 years to monitor proper utilization of financial assistance and assets created.
29.4. Beneficiary Identification:
Identify suitable beneficiaries for Categories C and D according to the Annual Action Plan and facilitate their online applications. Ensure no repeated benefits for the same beneficiary.
29.5. Melas cum Training Sessions:
Organize Melas cum Training sessions for pre-selected beneficiaries of Categories C and D with manufacturers/suppliers and departmental officers.

30. Project Cost
30.1. Definition:
Project Cost includes the cost of plant and machinery, civil construction, land value, and working capital.
30.2. Working Capital:
Working capital for subsidy calculation shall be a maximum of 20% of the projected annual turnover.
30.3. Land Cost:
Land cost shall not exceed 10% of the total proposed investment excluding land. Use either the actual land cost or 10% of total investment, whichever is less.
30.4. Land Value:
Land value shall be the Market Value Rate (MVR) or cost of land in the industrial area.
30.5. Cost Norms:
Unit costs for tools, plants, and machinery are as per annexures.
30.6. New Technologies:
New unit costs and specifications for tools, plants, and machinery will be added as new technologies become available.

31. Branding
31.1. Logo Development:
TSG and Nodal Officer shall develop a logo for branding. This logo will be provided to beneficiaries and wood-based industries in Bihar for brand development.

32. Market Development
32.1. Common Marketplace:
Develop a market where farmers can sell timber to wood-based industries.
32.2. Virtual Market:
Develop a virtual market for buyers and sellers to connect.

33. Grievance/Appeal
Grievance Redressal System:
33.1. Level 1:
Nodal Officer: Resolve grievances within 15 days.
33.2. Level 2:
PMC: Resolve grievances within 1 month if unresolved at Level 1 or if investor is unsatisfied.
33.3. Level 3:
Minister (DEFCC): Resolve grievances within 30 days if unresolved at Level 2 or if investor is unsatisfied.

34. Grievance/Appeal and Facilitation Desk
34.1. Facilitation Desk:
Constituted under the Nodal Officer to assist investors with:
Resolving queries
Project preparation
Machine identification
Cost discovery
Online submission assistance
Finalizing project submissions

35. Penalty
35.1. False Declarations:
Recovery of capital subsidy along with 18% annual interest for false declarations or ineligible units. Non-payment will be recovered as arrears of land revenue.

36. Miscellaneous
36.1. Definitions:
Terms used in these guidelines shall have the same meaning as defined in the Bihar Wood Based Industries Investment Promotion Policy, 2020, and Bihar Industrial Investment Promotion Policy, 2016, unless specified otherwise.
36.2. Effective Date:
These guidelines are effective from the date of issue and will remain operational until 31st March 2025.

THANK YOU

