Occasional Paper—10
Problems and Prospects of Agricultural Development in Bihar
T N Jha
K U Viswanathan
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development
Mumbai
1999

Published by:
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development,
Department of Economic Analysis and Research,
Jeevan Seva Complex (Annexe),
S.V. Road, Santacruz (W),
Mumbai - 400 054
Printed at:
Karnatak Orion Press,
Fort, Mumbai - 400 001.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The study on "Problems and Prospects of Agricultural Development in Bihar" was conducted in-house during 1995-96 as a part of the series of state-level sectoral studies initiated by the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD). In the process of completing the study report, we received encouragement as well as help in conceptualizing the outline of the study as also in data collection, tabulation, and typing of the manuscript from various sources. We express our deep sense of gratitude to:
Dr. A.K. Bandyopadhyay, Chief General Manager, Department of Economic Analysis and Research, NABARD, for his constant encouragement and providing necessary guidance at different stages of the study.
The cooperation extended by the Officer-in-charge, NABARD, Regional Office, Patna is deeply acknowledged.
Shri. Neeraj Sharma, Agricultural Economist, NABARD, Regional Office, Patna, for his excellent support during data collection for the study.
The Department of Economics and Statistics, Government of Bihar and the A.N. Sinha Institute of Social Sciences, Patna for providing necessary data for the study.
The moral support provided by our colleagues in the department is also gratefully acknowledged.
Shri. Satheesan Kartha, Shri. Sriram Iyer, Smt. Amrapalli Kamble, and Smt. Ujjwal Desai for their excellent support in data entry, comparison, and typing of the draft report.
The views expressed in this report are those of the authors alone and not of the institution.
Mumbai
Authors
September, 1999
Authors:
Dr. T.N. Jha, Deputy General Manager.
Shri K.U. Viswanathan, Assistant General Manager.
Department of Economic Analysis and Research,
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development,
Jeevan Seva Complex, P.B. No. 16926,
S.V. Road, Santacruz (W),
Mumbai - 400 054.

CONTENTS
Title Page No.
I. Map of Bihar ……………………………………………………….. 1
II. Executive Summary ……………………………………………… 7
III. Major Findings and Policy Implications ……………………… 25
IV. Introduction ……………………………………………………. 33
V. Profile of the State ………………………………………………… 39
VI. Growth Performance of Foodgrains in Bihar - Temporal and Districtwise Analysis ……………………… 51
VI.1. Paddy ……………………………………………………….. 64
VI.2. Maize ……………………………………………………….. 69
VI.3. Wheat ……………………………………………………….. 76
VI.4. Arhar ………………………………………………………… 81
VI.5. Gram ………………………………………………………… 87
VI.6. Rapeseed/Mustard ………………………………………… 93
VI.7. Sugarcane ………………………………………………….. 99
VI.8. Jute ………………………………………………………….. 104
VI.9. Potato ……………………………………………………….. 110
VI.10. Chillies …………………………………………………….. 116
VI.11. Tobacco …………………………………………………… 123
VII. Cropping Pattern and Area Shifts Across Major Crops ……….. 129
VIII. Yield Increase: Crop-wise Comparative Analysis …………….. 133
IX. Trend and Pattern of Land Use - Zone-wise/District-wise Analysis ……………………………………………… 139
X. Growth in Fertiliser Consumption - Temporal and Spatial Pattern ………………………………………………… 147
XI. Growth in Irrigation - Temporal and Spatial Analysis ………… 157
XII. Expansion in the Use of HYV Seeds ……………………………. 165
XIII. Flow of Institutional Credit ……………………………………. 171
XIV. Operational Holdings and Tenancy Status …………………… 178
Bibliography …………………………………………………………. 178

MAP OF BIHAR SHOWING AGRO-CLIMATIC ZONES AND DISTRICTS (1974)

Zone I: North West Alluvial Plain Districts
West Champaran
East Champaran
Gopalganj
Siwan
Saran
Sitamarhi
Muzaffarpur
Vaishali
Madhubani
Darbhanga
Samastipur
Zone II: North East Alluvial Plain Districts
Purnia
Katihar
Saharsa
Begusarai
Munger
Bhagalpur
Nalanda
Patna
Aurangabad
Bhojpur
Rohtas
Zone III: South West Alluvial Plain Districts
Hazaribagh
Giridih
Santhal Pargana
Dhanbad
Palamau
Ranchi
Singhbhum
Zone IV: Plateau Districts
Kodarma
Hazaribagh
Lohardaga
Gumla
Garhwa

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The present study in respect of Bihar is a part of the state-specific sectoral study of agriculture initiated by the National Bank in different states at the behest of Hon'ble Union Minister of Finance. Concentrating on the crop sector, it was set with the broad objectives of examining the growth performance of agriculture—both food and non-food crops, sources of growth, crop pattern and area shifts, changes in land-use pattern, growth in use of inputs such as fertilizer, irrigation, HYV seeds, and credit, and analyzing operational holdings and tenancy status in the state. The analysis was based on secondary data covering the post-green revolution period 1971-93 at the state level and 1977-91 at zone/district level. Major findings of the study along with policy implications are summarized below.
Performance of Agriculture
Growth Performance of Foodgrains Production
The growth performance of foodgrains production in the state at 0.48% per annum was one of stagnation till 1982-83. The period from 1983-84, however, witnessed an accelerated growth rate at 2.73% with a low coefficient of variation. It compared well with the growth rates experienced in agriculturally developed states during the eighties.
Much of the increase in foodgrains production during 1984-93 in the state was in rabi season (4.93%), whereas kharif season production continued to stagnate (0.59%). Accelerated growth rate in rabi foodgrains output was seen in both area and yield increase. Stagnant kharif foodgrains production was largely due to a sharp decline in kharif area at (-)1.32% per annum.
Analyzing the growth performance across different agro-climatic zones, the study observed plateau districts to lag behind. The zones of alluvial plains, particularly the South-West Plains, recorded accelerated growth rates, comparable to the rate of growth achieved by agriculturally developed states during the eighties. High growth districts generally did not form one geographical cluster.
Non-Food Crops
With only 10% area under non-food crops, the agriculture of Bihar continued to be largely subsistence in character. Production of some specific non-food crops, however, registered an increase in specific regions. For instance, sugarcane picked up fast in the North-West, and rapeseed/mustard in the East Plains. Over the years, area shifts were taking place in favor of superior cereals.
Cereal Crops
Among the cereal crops, wheat (3.80%), followed by paddy (3.50%) showed relatively high growth rates. For wheat, both area and yield contributed to growth. In the case of paddy, growth was due to yield increase, as area showed shrinkage. Summer and winter paddy production witnessed impressive growth performance in the state.
Pulses
Among pulses, production of arhar and gram witnessed reversal largely due to area shrinkage. Districts in the plateau region, however, showed a steady growth trend in their production.
Status of Agriculture
Comparison with Other States
Despite accelerating growth rates in foodgrain as well as non-foodgrain production, the status of agriculture in Bihar was not comparable to agriculturally developed states or even the all-India average. With similar area, West Bengal produced more than double the paddy output in Bihar. Similarly, Haryana with half of the area produced almost equal wheat output to Bihar. The case of other crops such as maize, arhar, gram, sugarcane, rapeseed/mustard, and potato was not different. This was largely because the yield of these crops in Bihar was much less than those in agriculturally developed or other states. Moreover, the yield gap between the potential and the actual was large at 50-70% in the state, depending upon the crop and irrigated condition.
Factors Influencing Growth of Agriculture
Fertilizer
Consumption of fertilizer increased from 9.06 kg/ha. in 1970-71 to 57.02 kg/ha. in 1992-93. However, it lagged far behind Punjab (162.2 kg/ha.), Haryana (107.0 kg/ha.), Uttar Pradesh (86.0 kg/ha.), and all-India average (67.1 kg/ha.). Across zones/districts, it was relatively high in regions with high foodgrains production. It was positively related to the irrigation network as well. Some districts with low irrigation network in the plains also showed relatively high consumption of fertilizers, influenced possibly by normal rainfall.
In terms of composition, fertilizer use was unbalanced in the state, more in favor of nitrogen (67.5%) and deficient in phosphorus (22.5%) and potash (10.0%). Unbalanced use of fertilizer was excessive in zones/districts with high production of foodgrains as well as irrigation network. With elasticity of foodgrains yield to nutrient ratio index being negative, the adverse impact of such an unbalanced use of fertilizer was clearly discernible and, therefore, called for gearing up the agricultural extension network in the state, promoting balanced use of fertilizer as well as enhanced use of manure and compost in the state.
Irrigation
Despite vast irrigation potential, the availability of irrigation in only 43.0% of net sown area was much less in the state. Over the years, it was not increasing either. The fall in net irrigated area by 1.04 lakh hectares for canal, 0.49 lakh hectares for tubewells, 1.62 lakh hectares for other wells, and 0.38 lakh hectares for tank/pond irrigation during 1977-91 was a serious cause of concern and called for necessary policy initiative to reverse such trends.
Irrigation intensity was low at 122% in the state as against 180.0% in Punjab and 163.0% in Haryana. Districts with a high component of cash crops showed relatively high irrigation intensity. Prominent among these districts were Gopalganj (170.0%), Katihar (178.0%), and Purnea (161.0%).
Irrigation was used mostly for food crops with their share at around 93.0% in 1990-91. Among the foodgrains, it was cereals (93.0%), and among cereal crops, it was paddy (46.0%), followed by wheat (40.0%) having a dominant share in irrigation. In the plateau zones, however, most of the irrigation was going to non-food crops. With elasticity of irrigation positive on yield, fertilizer consumption, crop intensity, and crop diversification, any development strategy aimed at output maximization called for further strengthening of the irrigation network in the state.
HYV Seeds
Area under HYV Seeds was expanding in the state with its significant influence on agricultural output. Across different zones/districts, the use of HYV seeds was positively correlated with irrigation. In terms of area coverage, however, it was much less as compared to the agriculturally developed states. HYV seeds were available for a restricted number of crops, that too under irrigated conditions. With almost half of the state under dryland, the available HYV package was quite inadequate for the state. Moreover, seed multiplication rate as well as replacement rate was low in the state. In addition to the poor supply network, the absence of proper storage facilities and multiplication of quality seeds were reported to be the major constraints in the state.
Flow of Credit
Credit Disbursement
There was a wide gap between credit requirements as estimated by various committees and actual credit flow in Bihar. In terms of credit available per hectare, it was just Rs. 312/- in Bihar as against Rs. 5,961/- in Kerala, Rs. 2,155/- in Tamil Nadu, and Rs. 1,189/- in Punjab in 1992-93. With cooperatives and Regional Rural Banks becoming redundant, the onus of credit disbursement seemed to be shared largely by commercial banks in the state. In the context of deposits increasing and advances remaining stagnant, their involvement, however, remained desirable.
Operational Holdings and Tenancy Status
Land Distribution and Tenancy
The state witnessed a fast increase in the number of operational holdings, thereby reducing the average size of holding and making them operationally non-viable. Skewness in land distribution continued to be serious in the state. High incidence (around 60%) of tenancy cultivation dominated largely by absentee landlords (estimated at around 16.60 lakh ha.) further choked the growth prospects, as such segment of land remained out of the investment gamut. High fragmentation of land (17-20 parcels on an average) was still worse, as it restricted and hindered the dissemination of modern technology in the state agriculture.
Changing Land Use Pattern
Land Use
Availability of agricultural land was low at 62.50% in Bihar as against 86.70% in Punjab and 68.10% in U.P. With high current fallow and culturable waste, the net sown area was still low at 45.20% only. The net sown area showed shrinkage at (-)0.79% per annum largely due to expanding current fallow, area under miscellaneous trees, and land under non-agricultural use. In some districts, increasing barren land also explained the declining net sown area. Shrinking net sown area with population increasing fast implied land-man ratio getting further adverse for agriculture in the state. Gross cropped area was declining more as a result of stagnant and inefficient irrigation.
Policy Implications
Policy Recommendations
The following policy recommendations are made to address the issues highlighted and enhance agricultural growth:
Water Management: Implement area-specific plans for managing waterlogging and drainage. Develop plans to address barren land and soil erosion, particularly in plateau districts. Emphasize low-cost protective/supplemental irrigation.
Land Management: Expedite land dispute resolutions. Increase R&D efforts for HYV seeds, especially for unirrigated conditions. Enhance seed multiplication and storage facilities. Include tenant cultivators in production credit schemes.
Input Use: Promote the balanced use of fertilizer and enhance the use of compost. Ensure regular maintenance of irrigation investments and promote low-cost irrigation schemes.
Credit Support: Amend credit norms and tenancy laws to support agricultural financing and growth. Address the gap between credit requirements and disbursement.
Flow of Credit
Credit Disbursement: There was a significant gap between the estimated credit requirements and actual credit flow. In 1992-93, credit per hectare in Bihar was much lower compared to states like Kerala, Tamil Nadu, and Punjab.
Challenges: With co-operatives and Regional Rural Banks facing issues, commercial banks became the primary credit source. Despite increased deposits, the credit flow remained stagnant, affecting agricultural investment.
Operational Holdings and Tenancy Status
Land Holdings: There was a rapid increase in the number of operational holdings, reducing the average size and making them less viable.
Tenancy and Fragmentation: High tenancy (around 60%) and significant land fragmentation (17-20 parcels per holding) hindered investment and technology adoption.
Changing Land Use Pattern
Agricultural Land: The availability of agricultural land was low in Bihar (62.50%) compared to states like Punjab and U.P.
Net Sown Area: Declining at a rate of -0.79% per annum due to factors like current fallow, miscellaneous trees, and non-agricultural use.
Gross Cropped Area: Declining due to stagnant and inefficient irrigation practices.
Policy Implications
Low Output: Bihar’s agriculture remained subsistence despite the use of modern inputs. Low yields were due to inadequate use of irrigation, fertilizers, and high-yield varieties (HYV) seeds, along with poor credit flow.
Land and Tenancy Issues: High tenancy rates, land fragmentation, and inefficient input use restricted growth. The technology available was often not suited to local conditions.
Points of Action
Water Management: Implement area-specific plans to address water logging and promote drainage in flood-prone areas.
Soil and Land: Develop plans to manage barren land and soil erosion, especially in plateau districts.
Irrigation: Focus on low-cost protective irrigation and manage land disputes to facilitate cultivation.
Research and Development: Increase R&D for nucleus HYV seeds for various crops, and improve seed multiplication and storage facilities.
Credit and Investment: Relax credit norms for tenant cultivators, promote compost use, and ensure regular maintenance of irrigation infrastructure.
Irrigation Efficiency: Encourage farm electrification and manage irrigation through panchayats or extension networks.
Crop Development: Adopt area-specific plans for both food and non-food crops to enhance growth and productivity.

A. MAJOR FINDINGS
a) Performance of Foodgrains
Growth Performance:
The growth performance of foodgrains production in Bihar at 0.48% per annum was one of stagnation till 1982-83.
The period since 1983-84, however, heralded the beginning of a new era triggering an increase in foodgrains production in the State at 2.73% per annum.
The rate of growth in foodgrains production showed an accelerating trend during this period. With the growth rate showing a low coefficient of variation during the second sub-period, the increasing trend in foodgrains production could be considered to have stabilized in the State.
Seasonal Performance:
Much of the increase in foodgrains production was experienced in the rabi season (4.93%), as the production of foodgrains in the kharif season continued to stagnate (0.59%).
The increase in foodgrains production in the rabi season was due to both area and yield expansion.
Kharif Foodgrains:
Despite the yield of kharif foodgrains showing an increasing trend at 1.90% per annum, the production of kharif foodgrains remained stagnant (0.59%).
This stagnation was due to a sharp decline in the area under kharif foodgrains (-1.32%).
Geographical Distribution:
The share of the north-west plains (31.77%) and south-west plains (29.82%) in total foodgrains production of the State was relatively more compared to other agro-climatic zones.
Districts showing a high share in foodgrains production of the state included Rohtas (7.30%), Bhojpur (5.65%), Purnea (5.14%), and Santhal Parganas (4.77%).
Rate of Increase:
The rate of increase in foodgrains production in the second sub-period was high in the zones of the plains, with the south-west taking the lead (5.74%).
The plateau zone continued to lag behind with a trend growth rate of 3.27%.
District Growth:
Districts experiencing a relatively high rate of growth (above 5.0%) during the second sub-period included Madhubani, Samastipur, Patna, Nawadah, Nalanda, Purnea, Saharsa, and Giridih.
These did not form one geographical cluster, except a smaller patch of Patna, Nalanda, and Nawadah.
Districts with high growth were not necessarily those with high foodgrains production or with high growth in yield.
Yield Increase:
Districts showing a relatively high increase in the yield of foodgrains (above 4.50%) included East Champaran, Madhubani, Samastipur, and Vaishali in the north-west; Munger in the east; and Gaya, Santhal Parganas, Giridih, Hazaribagh, and Palamu in the plateau region.
Districts showing a relatively high rate of increase in area under foodgrains included Darbhanga and Muzaffarpur in the north-west; Saharsa in the east; and Nalanda and Nawadah in the south-west plains.
b) Crop-wise Performance
Cereal Crops:
Among the cereal crops, paddy, maize, and wheat were the important ones. All these crops showed an increasing trend in output.
The rate of growth was relatively more for wheat (3.50%) and maize (3.80%) during the second sub-period. For paddy, the growth rate was 2.59% per annum.
Increase in paddy and maize output was largely due to yield increase, as the area showed stagnant behavior. Maize showed significant area shrinkage. In the case of wheat, both area and yield contributed to the growth in output.
Comparative Growth:
Growth in wheat output during the second sub-period in Bihar was comparable to that in agriculturally developed states like Punjab and Haryana.
However, in the case of paddy and maize, Bihar lagged far behind other major states.
Yield Comparison:
The State lagged behind in terms of yield of these crops as well. While the yield for wheat in Bihar was 1790 kg/ha, it was 3760 kg/ha in Punjab and 3570 kg/ha in Haryana in 1990-93.
For paddy, it was 1001 kg/ha in Bihar as against 3293 kg/ha in Punjab, 3117 kg/ha in Tamil Nadu, and 1743 kg/ha at the all-India level.
Paddy Production:
Growth in paddy output was region-specific with districts of the south-west plains leading over other zones.
Districts with relatively high growth rate in paddy output included Nalanda, Nawadah, Saran, Munger, and Palamu.
Although winter paddy was dominant in terms of production, the rate of growth in production was higher for autumn and summer paddy. Yield levels were relatively higher for summer paddy.
While winter paddy was cultivated widely across different agro-climatic zones, cultivation of summer and autumn paddy was region-specific. For autumn paddy, the districts of the north-west plains dominated, whereas for summer paddy, the districts of the east plains dominated.
Wheat Production:
Production of wheat was district-specific, largely in the north-west and south-west plains.
Districts with high shares in State wheat production included Rohtas (9.92%), Bhojpur (7.43%), Begusarai (5.95%), East Champaran (5.65%), Gopalganj (5.65%), Saran (5.44%), and Siwan (5.27%).
The rate of growth was relatively high in less predominant districts such as Sitamarhi (10.39%), Nalanda (9.51%), Nawadah (8.75%), and Hazaribagh (12.02%). Both yield and area increase contributed to growth in wheat output. The rate of growth in wheat production in all such districts was comparable to that in agriculturally developed states.
Arhar Production:
Production of arhar experienced a reversal in Bihar, although at a slackened rate in the second sub-period.
The decline in arhar production was due to area shrinkage, as yield was found to be increasing.
Production of arhar was region-specific with districts of the north-west plains leading, although these districts also showed a declining trend in arhar production. Compared to other states growing arhar, while Bihar was ahead in terms of yield level, it lagged far behind in production due to a much smaller area under the crop.
Gram Cultivation:
Like arhar, the cultivation of gram was region-specific, with the south-west plains alone producing two-thirds of the State's production.
While the State lagged in terms of area under gram, it was well ahead of other states in terms of yield. A reversal in gram production was observed in zones/districts with low area under gram. The zones/districts with a dominant share in gram production showed an increasing trend in both area and yield.
Rapeseed/Mustard Production:
Bihar, ranking ninth among the states, was emerging fast in rapeseed/mustard production, growing annually at 7.34% during the eighties.
The yield level in the State compared well with other major states. Both area expansion and yield increase contributed to the growth.
Production of rapeseed/mustard was region-specific with districts of the north-west and east plains having a dominant share. The rate of growth in these districts compared well with major states.
Sugarcane Production:
In terms of area, yield, and production of sugarcane, Bihar was next to Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra, and Tamil Nadu.
Moreover, production of sugarcane in the State showed a declining trend up to 1986-87 with wide year-to-year fluctuation. From 1987-88 onwards, however, it took an upswing with production reaching the level of 6031.8 thousand tonnes in 1992-93.
The upswing in sugarcane production during the second sub-period was attributable to both area expansion and yield increase. Production of sugarcane was region-specific with adjacent districts, namely East Champaran, West Champaran, and Gopalganj in the north-west plains, having a dominant share. Growth of sugarcane production in the state during the eighties was comparable to that in major sugarcane-growing states.
Jute Production:
Bihar has been traditionally growing jute. Jute production showed an increasing trend, although at a slackened rate during the second sub-period.
The increase in jute production was more due to yield increase, as area remained more or less stagnant. Production of jute was region-specific with the east plains having a dominant share. Districts such as Purnea, Katihar, and Saharsa were prominent in jute cultivation.
Potato Production:
In potato production, the State was only next to Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. It showed an increasing trend in both sub-periods.
The increase in potato production was more due to area expansion, as yield showed a declining trend. The yield was disappointingly low (9.15 t/ha.) in the State compared to major potato-growing states.
Across different zones, the north-west plains had the lead in production. Among the districts, Samastipur, Purnea, Nalanda, and Hazaribagh were leading. In terms of rate of growth, however, Madhubani, Samastipur, Begusarai, and Palamu were leading, largely due to area expansion.

22. Chilli Production Trends
The State excelled in chilli production till the early seventies. By the turn of the eighties, however, it was relegated to the bottom. The rate of decline in chilli production became sharp in the second sub-period ((-)11.99%), contributed by a decline in both area and yield. Further, production of chilli has been region-specific with the east and south-west plains leading. Among districts of these zones, it was produced largely in Begusarai and Rohtas.
23. Narcotics and Beverages
The crop group of narcotics and beverages was not significant in the State. Among them, tobacco alone found a place of relative prominence, and the State ranked fifth in the country in its production. While most of the tobacco-growing states recorded significant increases in tobacco production, Bihar showed a declining trend during the eighties. It was largely due to a sharp decline in the yield level, as area showed an increasing trend. Production of tobacco was, however, specific to the north-west plains. Among the districts, Samastipur and Vaishali occupied prime positions in tobacco production, and both the districts showed an increasing trend in its production. Contrary to the general scenario, both area and yield of tobacco in these districts showed an increasing trend during the second sub-period.
c) Cropping Pattern and Area Shift
With only 8.20% area under non-food crops, the agriculture of Bihar was largely subsistent. Among the foodgrains, cereal crops dominated (80.50%), whereas pulses formed only 11.27%. Across different zones, non-food crops were relatively more dominant in the north-west and east plains. Further, specific non-food crops were grown in specific districts. For instance:
Sugarcane: Cultivated in a cluster of districts such as West Champaran, East Champaran, and Gopalganj.
Rapeseed/Mustard: Concentrated in Purnea and Begusarai.
Jute: Dominated by a cluster of districts such as Purnea, Katihar, and Saharsa.
Chilli: Prominently produced in Begusarai and Rohtas.
Potato: Prominent in Samastipur, Purnea, Gaya, Hazaribagh, and Ranchi.
Tobacco: Dominated by districts such as Samastipur and Vaishali.
Districts of the east plains were more dominant in the cultivation of diversified crops such as jute, chilli, and rapeseed/mustard.
24. Area Shift Analysis
Analysis of area shifts across different crop groups suggested that:
Cereal Crops: Gained in area.
Spices and Pulses: Lost their area during both sub-periods, though relatively less in the second sub-period.
Oilseeds, Fibres, and Fruits-Vegetables: Showed a loss of area during the second sub-period.
Between the superior and coarse cereals:
Superior Cereals: Gained in area marginally (e.g., wheat).
Coarse Cereals: Lost their area almost in similar measure (e.g., small millets).
Among pulses:
Other Pulses: Gained in area.
Major Pulses: Such as gram and arhar lost their area.
Among oilseeds:
Rapeseed/Mustard: Gained in area.
Linseed and Nigerseed: Lost their area.
Among fibre crops:
Jute: Gained in area.
Mesta and Sunhemp: Lost their area.
Similarly, among spices:
Chilli: Lost its area.
Turmeric: Gained in area.
Sugarcane and Tobacco: Gained in area, particularly during the second sub-period.
d) Yield Increase - Crop-Wise Comparative Analysis
Analysing the comparative increase in yield of major crops, the broad conclusions are as follows:
i) Declining Trend:
Jowar: (-6.47%)
Bajra: (-1.97%)
Chillies: (-2.49%)
Tobacco: (-2.98%)
Potatoes: (-0.19%)
ii) High Rate of Growth in Yield:
Maize: 5.14%
Small Millets: 4.27%
Rapeseed/Mustard: 3.07%
Sugarcane: 6.02%
iii) Modest Increase in Yield:
Paddy: 2.27%
Ragi: 2.46%
Wheat: 2.19%
Other Pulses: 2.23%
iv) Marginal Rate of Yield Increase:
Barley: 1.89%
Arhar: 1.00%
Gram: 1.35%
Nigerseed: 1.74%
Jute: 1.65%
e) Land Use Pattern
The study revealed the following broad conclusions in respect of the trend in land use pattern:
i) Availability of Land for Agriculture:
Relatively low in the state at 62.50%, compared to 86.70% in Punjab and 68.10% in Uttar Pradesh.
Declined from 65.9% in 1970-71 to 62.5% in 1990-91.
ii) Net Sown Area:
Less at 45.26%, with a declining trend (-0.79%) during 1971-93.
Shrinkage due to expanding area under miscellaneous tree crops (1.70%) and land under non-agricultural use (0.47%).
iii) Declining Trend in Net Sown Area:
Uniform across different agro-climatic zones, relatively more in the plateau districts (-1.44%).
iv) Rate of Decline in Net Sown Area:
Sitamarhi: (-1.47%) in the north-west plains
Munger: (-3.47%) in the east plains
Santhal Parganas: (-1.83%)
Ranchi: (-1.89%)
Giridih: (-1.70%) in the plateau zone
The decline in net sown area was clearly visible in increasing current fallow, barren land, land under miscellaneous tree crops, and land under non-agricultural use.
v) High Rate of Decline in Current Fallow:
Gopalganj, Siwan, West Champaran: North-west
Munger: East
Nalanda, Nawadah: South-west
Dhanbad, Hazaribagh: Plateau
vi) Increasing Trend in Area Under Barren Land:
Darbhanga, East Champaran, Sitamarhi, Vaishali: North-west
Aurangabad, Rohtas: South-west
Dhanbad: Plateau zone
vii) Cropping Intensity:
Remained stagnant at around 135% in Bihar.
Significant decline in gross cropped area observed across all agro-climatic zones, more prominently in the plateau zones.
Madhubani and Sitamarhi: North-west
Munger: East
Aurangabad and Gaya: South-west
Ranchi, Santhal Parganas, and Giridih: Plateau zone
f) Trends and Pattern of Growth in Input Use
Fertilizer
i) Fertilizer Consumption:
Increased significantly from 9.06 kg/ha. in 1970-71 to 57.2 kg/ha. in 1992-93.
Still lagged behind states like Punjab (162.2 kg/ha.), Haryana (107 kg/ha.), Uttar Pradesh (86.0 kg/ha.), and all-India average (67.1 kg/ha.).
ii) Consumption by Zone:
Relatively high in the south-west (87.36 kg/ha.) and low in the plateau (25.66 kg/ha.) zone.
Comparable to agriculturally developed states in districts such as Patna (135.86 kg/ha.), Nalanda (116.74 kg/ha.), Nawadah (92.71 kg/ha.), Begusarai (103.62 kg/ha.), and Bhojpur (87.98 kg/ha.).
iii) Fertilizer Use and Yield:
High in zones/districts showing higher yield levels.
Positive elasticity of foodgrains yield to fertilizer use and elasticity of fertilizer use to irrigation.


Composition of Fertilizer Use
iv) Composition of fertilizer use in the State was unbalanced, more in favour of nitrogen (67.5%) and deficient in phosphorous (22.5%) and potash (10.0%). Across different agro-climatic zones, unbalanced use of fertiliser was more in the south-west plains showing high foodgrains production, irrigation network and fertilizer consumption. Districts with excessive share of nitrogen (above 85.0%) included Muzaffarpur and Vaishali in the north-west; Munger and Bhagalpur in the east; and Bhojpur, Gaya, Nalanda, Nawadah, Patna and Rohtas in the south-west plains.
v) The adverse impact of excessive use of nitrogen on yield of foodgrains was clearly observed in different agro-climatic zones/districts as elasticity of foodgrains yield to nutrient ratio index was negative.
Irrigation
vi) With only around 43.0% of net irrigated area, the coverage of irrigation was low in the State when compared with the vast irrigation potential that the State is endowed with. Compared to states like Punjab, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh, it was much less.
vii) Of the several sources of irrigation, tubewells followed by canal dominated in the State. Tubewell irrigation alone showed increasing trend while all other sources, including canal, were declining.
viii) Across different agro-climatic zones/districts, the south-west plain was relatively more irrigated (81.14%). It was the least in the plateau zone (7.19%). Given the high irrigation potential of the north-west and east plains, coverage of irrigation at around 45.0% in these zones was low.
ix) Analysing the growth in canal irrigation, it is observed that while at State level it showed increasing trend, the north-west and plateau zones showed shrinkage. Districts to show high decline in canal irrigation included East Champaran, West Champaran and Gopalganj in the north-west plains; and Santhal Parganas in the plateau zone. In effect, there was a fall of 1.04 lakh hectares in canal irrigation (9.50% of canal irrigation) in all such districts during 1979-91.
x) Tubewell irrigation increased in most of the districts, mainly in the plain land. There were, however, districts such as Muzaffarpur, Munger, Aurangabad and Rohtas where it showed shrinkage during 1977-91. The aggregate decline in tubewell irrigation in the State during this period was 0.49 lakh hectares which formed 3.53% of total tubewell irrigation in the State.
xi) Irrigation through other wells was prominent in a few districts only, mainly in the plateau zone. However, most of these districts registered a decline in it, aggregating to 1.62 lakh hectares. This formed 124.5% of the irrigation through other wells in 1990-91.
xii) Irrigation through ponds/tanks also showed sharp decline in the state, aggregating to 0.38 lakh hectares during this period. It formed 33.10% of the aggregate irrigation through ponds/tanks in the State in 1990-91.
xiii) Irrigation intensity was low at 124% for the State as against 180% in Punjab, 163% in Haryana and 140% in Uttar Pradesh. Moreover, over the years it remained stagnant. Across different districts it was relatively high in Gopalganj (170%), Katihar (178%), Purnea (161%) and Rohtas (157%). It was quite low in Saran (93%), Sitamarhi (106%), Vaishali (107%) and Begusarai (107%). Districts with high irrigation intensity were largely those having largely canal and tubewell irrigation.
xiv) Irrigation was used mostly for foodgrain crops with their share in gross irrigated area at 93.07% in 1990-91. Among the foodgrains, it was the cereals (92.89%) and of the cereal crops, it was paddy (45.55%), followed by wheat (40.08%) and maize (6.84%) which had dominant share in irrigation. Similar was the pattern of irrigation use across different agro-climatic zones, except the plateau where miscellaneous crops had a share of 29.20% in gross irrigated area. In districts such as Dhanbad, Ranchi, Hazaribagh and Giridih, the share of miscellaneous crops in gross irrigated area was still high exceeding 50.0%.
xv) Examining the level of irrigation for different crops, the study showed that wheat with 85.52% of its area under irrigation had the highest coverage of irrigation. For maize and paddy, it was 43.15% and 35.47% respectively. Among the non-food crops, rapeseed/mustard and tobacco had higher levels of irrigation which also showed increasing trend.
xvi) The study observed positive influence of irrigation on yield, fertilizer consumption and crop intensity. Crop diversification is not found to be influenced by irrigation.
HYV Seeds
xvii) Area under HYV seeds was expanding in the state. However, compared to states such as Punjab, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh, coverage of HYV was quite low in Bihar.
xviii) Paddy, despite being a dominant crop, had low HYV area at around 34.0% only as against 94.0% in Punjab and 87.0% in Uttar Pradesh.
xix) While for paddy and wheat HYV area was increasing, in respect of maize it showed declining trend.
xx) Across different agro-climatic zones, the HYV area was increasing in respect of paddy, wheat as well as maize in the plain land, but the plateau districts showed declining trend in respect of all these crops.
xxi) Expansion in HYV area for wheat and paddy was region-specific. Spread of HYV area was relatively high in districts showing high production of such crops.
xxii) Amidst general scenario of declining trend in maize HYV area, districts with high production showed increasing spread of HYVs.
xxiii) Districts with high irrigation network showed higher coverage of HYV seeds. Similarly, crops with high irrigation showed higher coverage of HYVs. Again, the association between fertilizer consumption and coverage of HYVs was strong.
xxiv) Given the yield augmenting effect of HYVs, farmers of Bihar do not seem to wait for irrigation for its use, as HYV area was observed to show high positive elasticity even in districts with low irrigation network, including plateau districts.
Flow of Institutional Credit
xxv) The gap between the credit requirements, as estimated by the Sen Committee/Task Force/Potential Linked Credit Plan, and the actual flow of credit has been wide in the State such that not even 50% of the estimated credit requirements was being disbursed.
xxvi) Compared to other major states, the flow of credit in the State was much less. While it was as high as Rs. 5,961 per hectare in Kerala, Rs. 5,155 in Tamil Nadu and Rs. 1,189 in Punjab, it was just Rs. 312 in Bihar in 1992-93.
xxvii) The share of agriculture in the total credit flow was high at 67.6% in 1992-93 in the State. However, it showed wide year-to-year fluctuation which may be causing uncertainty in the use of modern inputs.
xxviii) Role of co-operative credit has reached dwindling level with their share reaching an almost negligible proportion.
xxix) With co-operatives and Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) assuming back seat, the commercial banks alone are playing active role in credit dispensation in the state. However, their involvement remains unbalanced, as advances are remaining stagnant while deposits are increasing.
xxx) District-wise analysis of credit flows clearly suggested that agriculturally more prosperous zones/districts got higher share of credit. It was evident from the relationship between share of the district in total foodgrains production and credit flows in the State.
xxxi) Zonal/Regional biasness in the flow of credit was not reflected in the State. The plateau zone had almost similar share in total credit flows as in other zones. Some of the districts in the plateau zone showed much higher flow of credit per hectare than those in the plain land.
xxxii) Mounting overdues have become endemic for the State with recovery level as low as 5.0% for PACS and 20.0% for BSLDB. Although commercial banks showed relatively better recovery performance at around 55.0%, it was not as good as in states like Haryana, Punjab and Kerala.
Operational Holdings and Tenancy Status
i) Number of operational holdings was increasing in the state thereby reducing the average size of holding and making them operationally non-viable. The total area under operational holding, on the other hand, was declining.
ii) The increasing numerical strength of marginal and small farmers was relatively high in Bihar (86.70%) compared to the national average (76.20%). The problem was further compounded by increasing sub-divisions and fragmentations.
iii) Although number of large farmers and area operated by them showed sharp decline, the fact that large farmers forming only 0.6% owned 10.5% of the total operational land indicates the continuation of skewed land distribution in the State.
iv) Concentration of land was district-specific with Purnea, Gaya and Muzaffarpur leading among them. The same districts showed fast increase in the number of operational holdings as well.
v) Land possession rate as well as land distribution rate was relatively low in Bihar as compared to other major states. According to studies, the declared surplus land in the State (158.0 thousand ha.) was also observed to be much less than the estimated surplus land (731.0 thousand ha.).
vi) Operational holdings are also highly fragmented with an average of 17-20 parcels. This must have hindered diffusion of modern technology and restricted application of mechanical mode.
vii) Despite prohibition of tenancy cultivation under Bihar Tenancy Act, the incidence of concealed tenancy was high at around 60% in the State. The form of tenancy was largely oral in the State to escape the law. The dominant form of oral tenancy was share cropping (97%) with fixed share in produce as rent. Under such tenancy, according to studies, while the sharecropper was left with a net return of 15%, the return to the landowner after deducting cost of land revenue and input costs worked out at around 35.0%.
viii) Despite sharing the input costs, the use of modern inputs was less in the case of sharecroppers, resulting in lower productivity. This was largely due to insecurity attached to tenancy cultivation.

Absentee Cultivation
ix) The menace of absentee cultivation was equally high in the State, estimated at around 16.6 lakh hectares, which accounts for about 25.0% of tenant holdings. This segment of land was out of the gamut of any investment as the sharecropper did not have the surplus nor could they obtain credit support due to security norms. The landowner was also not interested in investing in these pieces of land.
Policy Conclusions
30) The study revealed that foodgrains production in Bihar has recently accelerated and is on a stable growth path. However, considering the per capita availability of foodgrains and the State’s climatically favorable conditions, the production can’t be deemed adequate. For example, West Bengal and Uttar Pradesh, with almost equal areas, produced double the paddy output compared to Bihar. Similarly, Haryana produced almost the same level of wheat as Bihar with half the area. Non-food crops also show poor performance with relatively low area and yield. The primary issues in the foodgrains sector are low yield and shrinking area, while non-food crops suffer from low yield, low area, and largely unirrigated conditions.
31) The lower yield of food and non-food crops can be attributed to the low uptake of modern inputs such as irrigation, fertilizers, and HYV seeds. Irrigation in the state has not been increasing due to low investment in creating irrigation potential and inefficiencies in managing existing structures. Declining water tables and inadequate maintenance of water sources have worsened the situation. High irrigation costs, mainly due to diesel pumpsets, and the inadequacy of technology for exploiting groundwater and other resources also contribute to low irrigation. The need for low-cost, appropriate irrigation technology is crucial.
32) Fertilizer consumption, although increasing, remains relatively low in the State. This is partly due to inadequate institutional credit flow, irregular and untimely credit supply, and an inefficient supply mechanism. The unbalanced use of fertilizers, predominantly nitrogen, has adversely affected crop yield and soil fertility. This issue is more prominent in regions with high foodgrains production and irrigation.
33) The use of HYV seeds is also inadequate in Bihar, with limited availability for certain crops and largely under irrigated conditions. There is a strong need to develop and promote HYV seeds suitable for unirrigated and dry conditions, particularly for paddy. The replacement rate of HYV seeds is also inadequate, and seed multiplication infrastructure needs improvement.
34) Institutional credit needs significant strengthening in the State. Despite a decline in credit flow, agricultural production has increased, indicating that farmers are relying on their own resources or informal sources. The re-emergence of private borrowing reflects the inadequacy of institutional credit. The credit absorption capacity of the State is confirmed by the demand for modern inputs. The issue lies with the supply network and misconceptions about Bihar’s agricultural potential.
35) Poor institutional credit flow can be attributed to the dominance of tenancy cultivation, including absentee cultivation. Tenancy cultivators lack surpluses for farm investments, and absentee landowners often have alternative income sources, reducing their motivation to invest. Security norms for bank loans are prohibitive for these farmers. Amendments to the security norms to include oral tenants are needed.
36) Agriculture in some pockets of the State is diversifying, with increased areas for crops like rapeseed/mustard, sugarcane, jute, and others. However, the pace of diversification is slow. Districts like Purnea, East Champaran, and others have excelled in specific crops, showing potential for further diversification and involvement in high-tech agricultural projects.
37) A disturbing trend is the shrinkage in the area available for cultivation. Both net sown area and gross cropped area are declining. This decline, coupled with increasing current fallow and barren land, reduces potential crop production. Inadequate drainage facilities, increasing alkalinity/salinity, rising water tables, and soil erosion contribute to this issue. A multi-pronged strategy is needed to address these problems, drawing from successful models like Punjab’s green revolution, which combined drainage schemes, land consolidation, and modern inputs.
C. POINTS OF ACTION
38. On the basis of the broad findings of the study and policy implications thus arrived at, the following major points of action could be suggested:
i) Augmentation of Land Resources
39. There is an urgent need to check the declining trend in net sown area, caused largely by increasing current fallow, area under miscellaneous trees, and land under non-agricultural use. Increasing land dispute cases too have led to non-cultivation of land by absentee landlords. The following points of action may be necessary to check the decline in net sown area:
Current fallow, particularly in the plains, is largely due to recurring flood or drought, wide inter-spell of rainfall leading to abandonment of cultivation, and water-logging due to poor drainage, especially in low-lying flood-prone areas and the tail end of canal irrigation. The question of water-logging and drainage needs to be addressed more seriously. The problem of wide inter-spell of rain could be tackled by promoting the mechanism of protective irrigation to exploit groundwater or surface water resources, particularly in the plains.
Settlement of land dispute cases as well as providing secure tenancy with a package of incentive programs would also help in checking the net sown area from declining.
Investment programs/schemes for converting land under miscellaneous trees into cultivable areas may be launched to the extent it is environmentally friendly.
40. Canal irrigation, particularly in the east plains, has brought with it several issues, partly by increasing the water table leading to alkalinity/salinity of soils and partly by sand deposits. Disposal of canal water at the tail end has also rendered vast land uncultivable. The following measures may be initiated in all such areas by launching area-specific schemes:
Implementation of area-specific schemes to facilitate land treatment at the farm level.
Facilitating a change of cropping pattern best suited to new conditions.
Separate schemes of investment may be launched to cover farmers whose land is affected by canal water due to sand deposits or erosion.
Land at the tail end of the canal needs separate planning attention.
41. The increasing menace of soil erosion is the root cause of land turning barren in the plateau, caused largely by deforestation as well as abandonment of mines. The scale of investment required for treating abandoned mines or for afforestation programs may warrant the involvement of the corporate sector. This needs to be examined separately.
42. The study clearly revealed that while paddy, maize, small millets, other coarse cereals, arhar, gram, linseed, chillies, etc. showed shrinkage in area, crops such as wheat, rapeseed/mustard, jute, and turmeric showed expansion in area. To check the decline in the area of these crops and to provide the necessary impetus to sustain accelerated growth in some of these crops, there is a need to further enlarge crop-specific and area-specific development programs after identifying constraints to the growth of these crops.
ii) Strengthening Flow of Inputs
43. Although crop yield has of late been increasing in the state, it is yet to reach the level of agriculturally developed states. The relatively low crop yield in the state is clearly attributable to low use of modern inputs. The following action points are suggested separately for specific inputs:
44. Fertilizer is a major component of the modern yield-augmenting package. However, its use is observed to be not only low but also unbalanced in the state. The unbalanced use of fertilizer is more in favor of nitrogen and deficient in potash and phosphorous, particularly in intensively cultivated regions. Application of manure and compost is absent. Quality of fertilizer and timeliness of its supply is necessary to enhance the use of fertilizer in a more balanced manner. The following steps would be desirable for enhanced and balanced use of fertilizer in the state:
Tenant cultivators as well may be brought under the gamut of production credit by relaxing norms.
Supply arrangements for fertilizer also need radical changes to ensure quality as well as timeliness.
Simultaneous use of compost and manure may be popularized, making them components of crop loans.
45. Irrigation is basic to the yield-augmenting modern package. It was, however, not only low but also inefficient and costly in the state. The following package of programs would be essential to step up irrigation in the state:
Creating new irrigation potential needs to be stepped up, involving more private investment with adequate and timely credit support.
Credit support for investment in irrigation may be extended to include tenant cultivators as well.
Separate schemes for infructuous investments may be implemented to facilitate their utilization.
As a measure to reduce the cost of irrigation, a program of large-scale farm electrification may be emphasized.
Low-cost treadle pumps, appropriate for fragmented small holdings, may be encouraged under plan efforts.
46. Use of HYV seeds was low in the state. Moreover, it was restricted to a few crops, that too under irrigated conditions. Paddy, despite being the dominant crop, received neglect in the dissemination of HYVs, particularly the winter variety. Multiplication and replacement rates of HYV seeds were also low. The quality of the HYVs has also been questioned. The following points of action could be important in the dissemination of HYV seed technology in the state:
The R&D effort to evolve drought-resistant HYV seeds for a variety of crops, mainly paddy, is of paramount importance.
Seed multiplication programs, including those in the private sector, may be tagged with bank schemes for necessary financial support.
Seed certification may be made stringent and scientific.
Infrastructure for storage of seeds at district/taluk level must be created, involving bank support to protect the seeds from spoilage.

CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION
1.1 The growth rate in Net State Domestic Product (NSDP) at factor cost (at 1980-81 prices) in Bihar was 3.12% per annum during 1971-81. It increased to 4.21% during the subsequent period, i.e., 1981-91. The per capita income at constant prices (1980-81) increased from Rs. 919 in 1980-81 to Rs. 1142 in 1991-92, recording an annual growth rate of about 2.0%, compared to just 0.93% per annum during 1971-81. The growth rate in NSDP of the State was, however, not encouraging when compared with the all-India average (4.42%) and those in more developed states like Maharashtra (5.10%) and Punjab (5.31%).
1.2 The sectoral analysis of the NSDP suggests that much of the growth in Bihar emanated from the industrial and service sectors, which grew annually at 7.9% and 5.5% respectively during 1981-90. The NSDP from agriculture grew marginally at 0.16% during the same period. On the other hand, while the industrial sector contributed 17.38% and the service sector 28.48% to the NSDP, the share of the agriculture sector was high at 51.14% in 1980-81. The relative share of the industrial sector in NSDP increased to 25.46% and that of the service sector to 34.01% in 1989-90. Consequently, the agriculture sector's share declined to 40.53% in 1989-90.
1.3 Of the total population of 864 lakhs in 1991, around 278 lakhs (32.3%) were main workers in the state, of which 81.1% were engaged in agriculture either as cultivators or as agricultural laborers. With such an overwhelming size of workforce depending on agriculture and other sectors offering little scope to absorb the growing workforce, the policy thrust has to center largely around the expansion of the agriculture sector in the State. However, it is perceived that the performance of agriculture in Bihar, despite the vast potential, has been slender in the preceding few decades. For example, while the growth rate in foodgrains production during 1970-73 to 1990-93 was recorded at 2.60% as the all-India average, 4.83% for Punjab, 3.93% for Haryana, and 3.35% for Uttar Pradesh, it was only around 1.0% in Bihar. With a share of the population at 10.21%, the State contributed only 6.17% to the country's foodgrains output in 1990-93. Thus, while Punjab had a per capita per annum availability of foodgrains at 957 kg., followed by Haryana at 575 kg., it was only 121 kg. in Bihar in 1990-91, much less than the national average of 201 kg. per annum. Before policy prescriptions are suggested to augment agricultural production in the state, several questions arise regarding the status of agriculture and its growth across different agro-climatic zones in the state. Understanding the growth performance of major crops and input use patterns in the state is also crucial to assessing the development status of agriculture.
Objectives of the Study
1.4 The broad objectives of the present study are outlined as follows:
To examine the trend of growth in area, production, and yield of foodgrains and major crops in different agro-climatic zones and districts over time in the post-green revolution period.
To analyze cropping patterns and examine area shifts across major crops and crop groups.
To analyze the trend in land use patterns across different zones/districts.
To examine growth in input use across different agro-climatic zones/districts and its relationship with foodgrains production.
To analyze operational holdings and tenancy status in the State.
Methodology
a) Data Base
1.5 District-wise time series data on area, production, and yield of major crops, as well as aggregates of foodgrains, area under different land use classes, sources of irrigation, and the use of various inputs such as irrigation, fertilizers, and HYV seeds in agriculture were collected from the Directorate of Economics and Statistics, Government of Bihar, Patna. State-level data has been updated using various issues of the Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy (CMIE), Mumbai. Data on credit flows were collected from published sources such as the Task Force Report, Statistical Statements relating to Co-operative Movement published by the National Bank, Currency and Finance of the Reserve Bank of India, etc. For analyzing operational holdings and tenancy status in the State, data from the Agricultural Census Report and various published studies/reports were used.
b) Reference Period
1.6 The performance of agriculture in Bihar was studied for the post-green revolution period in the country, i.e., since the early seventies. For state-level analysis, the beginning year was taken to be 1970-71. In the case of zones/districts, 1976-77 was taken as the beginning year, because it was from this year that the required data on area, production, and yield of crops was available for 31 districts considered for spatial analysis. The end year for analysis at the state level was taken to be 1992-93, the year for which the latest data was available. In the case of zones/districts, the end year was taken to be 1990-91, as data at the zone/district level was available up to this year. Since there was no abnormal rainfall in any of the years during the period under reference, data for all the years was considered for analysis. For analytical purposes, the period of study was divided into two sub-periods: the first sub-period was from 1970-71 to 1982-83 at the state level and 1976-77 to 1982-83 at the zone/district level. The second sub-period was considered as 1983-84 to 1992-93 at the state level and 1983-84 to 1990-91 at the zone/district level. The demarcation between the two sub-periods was made based on the distinct pattern of increase in foodgrains production observed from 1983-84.
c) Selection of Zones/Districts
1.7 The growth performance of Bihar agriculture has been studied at both the state and zone/district levels. The zonal classification, as defined by Rajendra Agricultural University, Pusa and discussed in Chapter II, has been adopted for this study. Selection of districts was complex due to changes since the early seventies. Bihar had originally 17 districts, which increased to 31 districts in 1973, 38 districts in 1978, 42 districts in 1990, and 53 districts in 1993. For this study, 31 districts as they existed in 1973-74 were considered, as the required data at the district level was uniformly available for these districts for the period under reference.
d) Selection of Crops

8 Study of Major Crops
In addition to studying foodgrain production as such, a detailed study was also attempted for specific major crops. Major crops were defined following different criteria for different crop groups to give proper representation to these groups in the present study.
a) Cereal Crops
All cereal crops having a cropped area exceeding one lakh hectares were included. This led to the identification of paddy, maize, and wheat as major crops in the State.
b) Pulses
Data were available in respect of arhar and gram alone. Therefore, these crops alone among the pulses were considered.
c) Oilseeds
Production of oilseeds is fairly high in the state. Prominent among them are rapeseed/mustard, linseed, nigerseed, sunflower seed, etc. As rapeseed/mustard occupied almost 50% of the oilseeds area, only this crop has been selected for detailed study.
d) Fiber Crops
Jute, being the single most important fiber crop, is also included as a major crop.
e) Spices
Among spice crops, the State figured prominently in respect of chillies, turmeric, coriander, and garlic. From among these crops, only chilli is considered, as it occupied the maximum area (around 60%) among spice crops.
f) Non-Foodgrain Crops
Sugarcane and potato are the other non-foodgrain crops considered as major crops for the present study, as they covered relatively large areas at 142.2 and 167.23 thousand hectares respectively in 1990-93.
g) Beverage and Narcotics Crops
Among the beverage and narcotics crops, tobacco with 15.6 thousand hectares under its cultivation was the only crop which could be considered a major crop.
Thus, the major crops identified for detailed study include:
Foodgrain Crops: paddy, maize, wheat, arhar, and gram
Non-Foodgrain Crops: rapeseed/mustard, sugarcane, jute, potato, chillies, and tobacco
These crops constituted 86.53% of the gross cultivated area in the state.
1.9 Analysis of Growth Rates
Performance of agriculture was examined in terms of compound annual rate of growth (CARG) in area, production, and yield of foodgrains as well as major crops during the period under reference. As explained earlier, it was obtained for the total period under reference as well as for two sub-periods separately to comprehend the growth performance in recent years in particular. Exponential trend function was used to estimate the compound annual rate of growth. Inherently, it assumes that the compound growth rate is constant over time and the growth is a continuous phenomenon.
The exponential trend equation takes the following form: Y=AebtY = Ae^{bt}Y=Aebt i.e., log⁡Y=log⁡A+bt\log Y = \log A + btlogY=logA+bt
where YYY = Area, production, and yield of a crop in year ttt (three-year moving average has been taken for netting out the seasonal and other fluctuations), AAA is a constant and bbb value in this equation expresses the rate of change and when multiplied by 100 gives the percentage growth rate.
1.10 Acceleration/Deceleration of Growth Rates
A semi-log quadratic function of the form: log⁡Y=a+bt+ct2\log Y = a + bt + ct^2logY=a+bt+ct2 was used to study the behavior of trends in growth rates. The sign of ccc in this equation conveys whether the trend is accelerating or decelerating with time.
1.11 Measure of Instability
Variability in the annual growth rates provides a measure of the degree of instability in production over the specified period. In the present case, departure from the trend line has been considered a measure of instability. Accordingly, the de-trended coefficient of variation was worked out for the production data series of different crops in different districts/zones using the following formula: CV=Standard DeviationMean×100\text{CV} = \frac{\text{Standard Deviation}}{\text{Mean}} \times 100CV=MeanStandard Deviation​×100
1.12 Valuation of Agricultural Output
Performance of agriculture was also measured in terms of compound annual rate of growth in the value of agricultural output during 1977-91 at the state/zone/district level. The value of agricultural output was obtained by considering 25 food as well as non-food crops, which constituted around 98.0% of the total cropped area in the state. Using 1980-81 prices of respective crops at the state level, the physical production of these crops was valued and added up to arrive at the aggregate value of agricultural output. On this basis, the compound annual rate of growth was worked out separately for food and non-food crops as well as the aggregate of agricultural output at the state/zone/district level for the total period under reference as well as for the two sub-periods.
1.13 Multiple Regression
To determine the influence of specified parameters on the value of agricultural output per hectare, the multiple regression technique was used in the following form: Y=a+b1X1+b2X2+b3X3+b4X4+eY = a + b_1X_1 + b_2X_2 + b_3X_3 + b_4X_4 + eY=a+b1​X1​+b2​X2​+b3​X3​+b4​X4​+e
where:
YYY = value of agricultural output per hectare,
aaa = constant,
X1X_1X1​ = consumption of fertilizer per gross cropped hectare,
X2X_2X2​ = percent of HYV area,
X3X_3X3​ = percent of gross irrigated area to gross cropped area,
X4X_4X4​ = percent deviation in actual rainfall,
b1,b2,b3,b4b_1, b_2, b_3, b_4b1​,b2​,b3​,b4​ refer to respective coefficients,
eee = error term.
1.14 Method to Study Area Shifts
Analysis of area shift was based on CMIE data at the State level, as it gave a wider scope for crop coverage with longer periods of analysis. The period from 1970-71 to 1992-93 is considered for the analysis. Analysis of area shift was made first for the crop groups and then for the major crops. Crop groups were classified as superior and coarse cereals among the cereal crops, total pulses, fruits and vegetables, oilseeds, fibers, spices, and miscellaneous crops. The percentage share of these crop groups in the gross cropped area was worked out for different years and the trend growth rate was obtained to determine the direction and rate of shift. Similarly, for major crops, the percentage share in respective crop groups during the year under reference was worked out and the trend growth rate on this was obtained to assess the direction of area shifts across major crops.
1.15 Method to Study Land Use Pattern
The land use pattern was studied for the period from 1951-91 at the State level. At the zone/district level, the period 1979-91 was considered, as the required data was available for that period only. Classification of land use, as adopted by the Directorate of Economics and Statistics, Government of Bihar, was used for the analysis. Trend growth rates using log-linear function were worked out for various categories of land use at the state/zone/district level for the period under reference.
1.16 Method to Study Expansion in the Use of Modern Inputs
Of the several modern inputs, three major ones—fertilizer, irrigation, and HYV seeds—were considered for detailed study, as it was in respect of these modern inputs that the required data were available. Moreover, these are the major constituents of modern inputs in physical terms.

1.17 Expansion in Fertilizer Consumption
Expansion in fertilizer consumption was first studied in terms of its physical volume expressed in the form of per hectare of gross cropped area at the state/zone/district level. The period under consideration was 1971-93 at the state level and 1977-91 at the zone/district level. In the second stage, the trend growth rate was worked out on this data to determine the direction and rate of change.
1.18 Composition of Fertilizer Consumption
The composition of fertilizer consumption was studied by working out the shares of different fertilizer nutrients, i.e., NPK, at two points of time to examine whether there was balanced consumption of fertilizer in the State and in what direction it was moving across different zones/districts. To further supplement the measure of imbalance in fertilizer consumption, the index of nutrient ratio was worked out for different zones/districts.
1.19 Elasticity of Nutrient Ratio
To better comprehend the question of how the unbalanced use of fertilizer influences the yield of foodgrains, the elasticity of the index of nutrient ratio with respect to foodgrains yield for different zones/districts was worked out.
1.20 Elasticity of Fertilizer Consumption
Elasticity of fertilizer consumption with respect to foodgrains production, irrigation, and rainfall was also worked out.
1.21 Elasticity of Irrigation
Similarly, the elasticity of irrigation with respect to the yield of foodgrains, fertilizer consumption, crop intensity, and crop diversification was also worked out.
1.22 Relationship of HYV Area
The relationship of HYV area with irrigation and fertilizer consumption at the state/zone/district level was also worked out following a simple regression equation considering the period from 1976-77 to 1990-91.
Chapter Scheme
1.23 Based on the analysis thus made, the present study is presented in twelve chapters:
Introduction
Profile of the State
Growth Performance of Foodgrains in Bihar - Temporal and District-wise Analysis
Growth Performance of Major Crops - Temporal and District-wise Analysis
Analysis of Cropping Pattern and Area Shift Across Major Crops
Yield Expansion: Crop-wise Comparative Analysis
Trend and Pattern of Growth in Land Use - Zone/District-wise Analysis
Growth in Fertilizer Consumption
Growth in Irrigation
Expansion in the Use of HYV Seeds
Flow of Institutional Credit
Operational Holdings and Tenancy Status

CHAPTER II
PROFILE OF THE STATE
The state of Bihar is stretched between 27°-31° and 20°-58° North Latitude and 88°-18° and 83°-20° East Longitude, with a total geographical area of 1.74 lakh square km. It is eighth in geographical spread among the states in the country. Physiographically, it is divided into three distinct regions:
North Bihar: The most fertile part of the state, largely falling under the Gangetic plains. Topography is entirely plain with drainage from west to east submerging in the river Ganges.
South Bihar: Also has plain topography, but its drainage emanating from the plateau region has a south to north direction, merging again into the Ganges.
Chhotanagpur Plateau Region: The largest in size, accounting for 46.0% of the state's geographical area. It is characterized by an undulating topography with several plateaus ranging from 300m to 1000m above sea level and valleys in between.
i) Agro-Climatic Zones
While demarcating the agro-climatic zones of the country, the Planning Commission categorized the districts of Bihar into two zones and three sub-zones:
Middle Gangetic Plains: This zone includes the sub-zone named North-East Alluvial, consisting of districts such as Aurangabad, Begusarai, Bhagalpur, Darbhanga, Gaya, Gopalganj, Katihar, Khagaria, Madhepura, Madhubani, Munger, Muzaffarpur, Nalanda, Nawadah, West Champaran, Patna, East Champaran, Rohtas, Saharsa, Samastipur, Saran, Sitamarhi, Siwan, and Vaishali. This stretches from west to east in the northern plains as well as in the south-west parts of the state.
Eastern Plateau and Hills: This zone consists of two sub-zones:
North Central Plateaus: With districts such as Deoghar, Dhanbad, Giridih, Gonda, Hazaribagh, Sahebganj, and Dumka.
Eastern Plateau: Consisting of districts such as Gumla, Lohardagga, Palamu, Ranchi, and Singhbhum.
The Rajendra Agricultural University, Pusa, however, classified the districts of Bihar into four comprehensive agro-climatic zones:
Table 11.1
Agro-Climatic Zonewise Distribution of Districts in Bihar
ii) Climate
The climate of the state is characterized by hot summers, wet monsoons, and dry cool winters, with maximum temperatures reaching above 45°C in June and minimum temperatures dropping below 5°C in January.
The climatic condition of the north-east alluvial sub-zone, as defined by the Planning Commission, is dry sub-humid to moist sub-humid with average annual rainfall at 1470 mm, mostly falling during the monsoon season from mid-June to September-October, often causing severe floods, especially in the upper reaches.
In the north-central plateau sub-zone, the climate varies between moist sub-humid and dry sub-humid, with average annual rainfall at 1296 mm, which is slightly less than the north-east alluvial sub-zone.
The climate of the eastern plateau is temperate, with mercury rising as high as 45°C in June. Although the average rainfall is similar to the north-central plateau, it is highly erratic, causing frequent drought conditions.
iii) Dependence on Rainfall
With only 43.7% of the net irrigated area, and that too having a low intensity of use at 125%, the agriculture of Bihar depends heavily on rainfall. However, the pattern of rainfall has been highly erratic in recent years, with either excessive rainfall causing floods, especially in North Bihar, or deficient rainfall aggravating drought conditions, particularly in the central and plateau regions of the state. The delayed arrival of the monsoon and wide inter-spell fluctuations have also been intermittent in the preceding few decades. Deficiency in rainfall, both in the plateau and plain regions of the state, has been a common feature with wide year-to-year fluctuations. Details can be seen from Table 11.2.

Table 11.2
Season-wise Rainfall in Bihar
(Rainfall in mm)
Note: Figures in brackets indicate the deficiency/sufficiency of rainfall in percentage.

iv) Hydrological Set-up
11.8 Hydrological set-up of a state/region becomes important in as much as it adds and augments the productive quality of the land. The state of Bihar is rich in respect of both mineral and hydrologically rich formations. The entire plain tract, i.e., 54.0% of the state's area, is floating on ground-water resources. The plateau region, on the other hand, has abundant mineral resources of high commercial value. The general geological succession obtaining in the state could be described as shown in Table 11.3.
11.9 Hydrologically, the state can be divided into four domains, namely:
(a) Main alluvial basins
(b) Marginal alluvial terrain
(c) Hard rock terrain
(d) Soft rock areas
The main alluvial basins vary in thickness from 20-30 m in the plateau region to nearly 2500 m in the north plain. It forms a single but heterogeneous aquifer system. Aquifers are available in abundance in both shallow and deep layers, capable of yielding good quantities of water, more so in latter cases. Marginal alluvial terrain is a low yield area, suitable for a series of open wells and small filter points. Such areas, however, are almost insignificant, restricted to Himalayan foothills of West Champaran district alone. Northern fringe of the alluvial tract near Himalayan foothills is, however, suitable for sinking of shallow heavy-duty tubewells and bamboo borings. Hard rock terrain, found in the plateau region, is best suited for large diameter open wells, as the yield of aquifer is low. The plateau region, particularly in the western side of the state, has soft rock areas, where ground water occurs in the weathered mantle and in the sandstones.

Table 11-3
Geological Succession Obtaining in Bihar

11.10 Depth of water during the pre-monsoon period varies from 1.90m in Sahar block of Bhojpur district in the south-west alluvial plains and the sub-zone of the north-east alluvial to 22.03 m in Chakulia block of Singhbhum district in the sub-zone of the Eastern plateau. Post-monsoon water levels vary from 0.18 m in Sabour block of Bhagalpur district to 11.03m in Atra block of Gaya district.
11.11 According to ground water resource evaluation, the state has been divided into nineteen sub-basins. They are:
Ganga
Gandak
Burhi Gandak
Bagmati-Adhawara
Kamla
Kosi
Mahananda
Karmnasa
Sone and North Koel
Punpun
Kiul and Harohar
Badka
Chandan
Chir
Gamai
Sankh
South Koel
Damodar
Subarnarekha

v) Soils
11.12 Broadly, there are six soil groups found in the state. They are:
i) Recent alluvium
ii) Young alluvium
iii) Old alluvium
iv) Sub-Himalayan and forest
v) Red and yellow
vi) Tal land
11.13 The entire range of plains, both in the north and south Bihar, has an alluvial tract. But the plateau region has red and yellow soils. In some parts of the plateau, black forest soils are also found. Fertility of these soils is not comparable to the one found in the plains of Bihar. The last category of land, i.e., Tal land, is found in the back-waters of the Ganges and Sone rivers, where land remains inundated during the kharif season, and it is available for sowing only during the rabi season. It is fertile and rich but prone to pest and disease.

vi) Flood Prone and Tal Areas
11.14 A fairly large chunk of area (19.7%) in the state is flood-prone. It is as high as 54.1% and 51.8% in the north-west and east alluvial plains respectively. Districts prone to flood are identified as East Champaran, West Champaran, Sitamarhi, Madhubani, Begusarai, Saharsa, Purnea, and Katihar. Sources of flood could be seen in the flowing of a large number of flood-prone rivers through the states, emanating largely from the neighboring Himalayan kingdom of Nepal and even the north-west hinterlands of the country. Prominent of such rivers include Ganga, Gandak, Burhi Gandak, Bagmati, Adhwara, Kamla, Kosi, Mahananda, and Punpun. Besides, there is a large chunk of low-lying areas around the river of Ganga flowing through such districts as Patna, Begusarai, Khagaria, and Bhagalpur, inundated by flood waters to recede only after December-January. This is known as Tal area. The problem of this area is distinct which needs specific treatment suitable to their conditions.

vii) Drought Prone Areas
11.15 A sufficiently large part (50.2%) of the state is drought-prone. It is as high as 86.1% in the plateau region and 72.4% in the eastern plains. In the south-west plains, around one-fourth is drought-prone. Such districts include Bhagalpur and Munger in the eastern plains, Rohtas in the south-west plains, and Dhanbad, Santhal Parganas, Singhbhum, Giridih, Palamu, and Ranchi in the plateau region.

viii) Population
11.16 Bihar was second only to Uttar Pradesh in terms of the size of human resources with a population of 864 lakh persons in 1991, growing annually at 2.1%, which was a little lower than the national average of 2.2%. Significantly, there was a reversal in the increasing rate of population growth in the State since the eighties. It was projected at 940 lakh persons for 1995. It had a share of 10.21% of the country's population. Density of population was high at 497 persons per sq. km., only next to West Bengal (767 persons). The sex ratio was 911 females per thousand males as against 927 at the all-India level. Like the all-India trend, the sex ratio in Bihar also showed a declining trend. The number of persons in the economically active age group of 20-59 was close to the all-India average at 42.0% for males and 43.9% for females. However, it was much less in comparison to states such as Maharashtra, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, and West Bengal. Further, the State continues to be predominantly rural in character with only 13.1% of the population living in urban conglomerations and 86.9% living in rural segments. In contrast, most of the major states such as Gujarat, Karnataka, Maharashtra, and Tamil Nadu showed urban populations consisting of more than 30.0% of their population. A fairly large chunk of the population (22.2%) of the State belonged to Scheduled Caste/Tribe groups.

ix) Migration
11.17 In terms of the volume of gross migration, the state of Bihar stood fifth (38.4 lakh persons) only next to West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra, and Madhya Pradesh in 1981. However, the extent of gross migrants was not such that the state population could be characterized as highly migrating. Only 5.5% of the population were migrants. Moreover, it was on the decline from 6.0% in 1971 to 5.5% in 1981. The volume of gross migrants increased only marginally by 13.75% over 1971-81. Moreover, outmigrants outnumbered inmigrants by double the size in both periods, i.e., 1971 and 1981. While outmigrants constituted 3.6% of the State's population in 1981, inmigrants constituted only 1.9%. The size of outmigration in Bihar was high only next to Uttar Pradesh in the country. On the other hand, the flow of inmigration was much less in the State. Net migrants thus stood at 1,182 thousand persons in 1981. Increase in the flow of inmigrants and outmigrants has been almost similar at 13.2% and 14.1% respectively for the State over 1971-81.

CHAPTER III
GROWTH PERFORMANCE OF FOODGRAINS IN BIHAR
TEMPORAL AND DISTRICT-WISE ANALYSIS

i) Production
111.2 Table III.1 presents area, production, and yield of foodgrains for intermittent years from 1970-71 to 1992-93 in Bihar. Based on this data, the index number of area, production, and yield with 1970-71 as the base has also been constructed and presented in Table III.1. It is observed that up to 1982-83 there was stagnation in foodgrain production in Bihar with wide fluctuations from as low as 71 lakh tonnes in 1979-80 to as high as 99 lakh tonnes in 1980-81, a variation of 39.5% in the minimum and maximum production. However, the period from 1983-84 experienced increasing foodgrains production, reaching the level of 122 lakh tonnes in 1990-91. With 1970-71 as the base, the index number of foodgrains production reached 156 in 1990-91.
111.3 The trend analysis of production of foodgrains for the period between 1970-71 and 1992-93 (Table III.2) suggests that during this period the foodgrains production was growing at a compound annual growth rate of 1.53% only. It was much less at 0.48% per annum during the first sub-period. The growth scenario of foodgrain production became more impressive during the second sub-period with a growth rate at 2.73% per annum. A close look at the physical data of production during 1984-93 clearly suggests that up to 1990-91 there was a continuous rise in the level of foodgrain production. But the subsequent years, i.e., 1991-92 and 1992-93, brought a significant reversal in production. Excluding these two years, the rate of growth in foodgrain production during 1984-91 worked at 4.70% per annum which was comparable to the growth rates experienced in agriculturally advanced states like Punjab (4.11%), Haryana (4.43%), and Uttar Pradesh (5.33%) during the same period.
111.4 Analysis of foodgrains production across kharif and rabi season suggests that much of the increase in foodgrain production in Bihar was in rabi season alone, as production of foodgrains in kharif season remained stagnant. For example, the production of foodgrains in kharif season was 5472.43 thousand tonnes in 1980-83, which increased to 5805.73 thousand tonnes in 1990-93 in the state. It grew at 0.59% per annum only. On the other hand, production of foodgrains in rabi season increased from 3016.37 thousand tonnes in 1980-83 to 4882.63 thousand tonnes in 1990-93, growing annually at 4.93%. Increase in foodgrains production in rabi season in Bihar during the eighties was comparable to that in Haryana (4.99%). It was even more than the growth rate achieved by Punjab (3.61%) during this period. However, it was much less than the increase experienced by West Bengal (8.66%) in rabi foodgrains production during the eighties.
Zone-wise/District-wise Spatial Analysis
111.5 Zone-wise/district-wise analysis of triennial average production of foodgrains (1988-91) as also share of different districts to state total or zone total suggests that districts such as Purnea in the east plains, and Rohtas and Bhojpur in the south-west emerged as the major granaries of the State with a share in state foodgrains production at 5.14%, 7.30%, and 5.65% respectively. East Champaran, Saharsa, Gaya, Nalanda, Patna, Santhal Parganas, and Ranchi produced equally high levels of foodgrains with each of these districts having a share of around 4.0% or more in State foodgrains output. On the other hand, districts such as Vaishali, Katihar, Nawadah, Giridih, Hazaribagh, and Palamu produced less than 2.0% of the total State foodgrains production.
111.6 Analysis of zone-wise/district-wise trend growth rates in production of foodgrains as also detrended coefficient of variation and rate of acceleration/deceleration over the period from 1976-77 to 1990-91 further suggests that there was a distinct pattern of increase in foodgrains production across different zones. The plateau region showed a declining trend in output of food crops at a compound annual growth rate of (-)0.71% per annum. The other zones, viz., north-west alluvial plains, East alluvial plains, and South-west alluvial plains, on the other hand, showed positive growth rates at 2.18%, 1.36%, and 2.51% respectively during the same period. It was relatively less in the east-alluvial plains at 1.36%.
111.7 Analyzing the growth performance separately for two sub-periods, it was observed that the plateau districts which had a negative trend in the growth of foodgrains production during the first sub-period showed an impressive reversal to positive growth at 3.27% per annum in the second sub-period. The south-west alluvial plains reached accelerated growth rate at 5.74% per annum during the second sub-period. The zones of north-west alluvial plains and east alluvial plains also experienced similar expansion in the output of foodgrains at 4.53% and 4.64% respectively during the second sub-period.
a) North-West Alluvial Plains
111.8 Among the eleven districts falling in this zone, only two districts, namely Sitamarhi and Samastipur, had growth performance (0.10% and 1.35%) less than the state average (1.55%) during 1977-91. All other districts, namely West Champaran, East Champaran, Gopalganj, Siwan, Saran, Vaishali, Muzaffarpur, Darbhanga, and Madhubani had some degree of homogeneity in growth performance, exceeding the state average. The districts of East Champaran and Siwan had still better performance levels with growth rates exceeding 3.0%. However, if the growth pattern is separately seen for the two sub-periods, it is striking to observe that most of the districts showed accelerated levels of growth rate during the second sub-period compared to the first sub-period. The rate of expansion in the second sub-period was, however, more in respect of districts such as East Champaran (4.90%), Madhubani (6.89%), Samastipur (5.43%), Gopalganj (4.64%), and Siwan (4.57%). These districts formed one homogenous geographical cluster.
b) East Alluvial Plains
111.9 The districts of this zone presented a different picture in terms of growth performance during 1977-91. While Munger showed a declining trend in output (-0.07%), districts of Purnea, Katihar, and Bhagalpur experienced positive growth. Saharsa showed relatively better performance levels (1.73%) exceeding even the state average. Begusarai offered a picture in contrast with growth rate at more than 5.0% per annum. The scenario took an upturn from 1983-84 among the districts of this zone as well. Of the six districts falling under this zone, three districts, namely Munger, Purnea, and Saharsa, showed growth rates exceeding 5.0% during this period. Even Katihar, which showed negative growth performance during the first sub-period, took a positive turn, growing at 2.81% per annum. Begusarai and Bhagalpur also showed modest increases at 3.92% and 3.48% respectively.
c) South-West Alluvial Plains
111.10 Districts falling under this zone showed homogeneity in growth rates of foodgrain production during 1977-91. Nawadah was an exception with the least growth rate at 1.11% only. Other districts, namely Aurangabad (2.95%), Bhojpur (3.29%), Gaya (2.62%), Nalanda (2.98%), Patna (1.55%), and Rohtas (2.34%) had growth rates much higher than the state average. The growth rates in these districts accelerated to a higher level during the second sub-period. A homogeneous tract comprising of districts such as Patna, Nalanda, and Nawadah experienced spectacular growth rates. The growth rate in Nawadah was more significant as it lagged far behind during the first sub-period (-4.84%), but increased to 13.1% during the second sub-period. Aurangabad and Rohtas had modest growth rates at 3.15% and 3.65% respectively during this period.
d) Plateau Districts
111.11 Of the seven districts falling in this zone, five districts experienced a decline in the production of foodgrains (0.5% to more than 1.0%) during 1977-91. Of the remaining districts, Hazaribagh showed positive growth (1.59%) which exceeded even the state average. Giridih showed a mere 0.76% growth during this period. The scenario changed during the second sub-period with a notable rise in production in the plateau districts at 3.27%. The districts of Hazaribagh (4.67%) and Palamu (4.52%) exhibited a high degree of growth rate. Even the districts such as Giridih and Dumka experienced positive growth rates of 3.38% and 2.15% respectively during the second sub-period. The improved scenario during the second sub-period was a notable feature of the plateau districts.

Zone-wise/District-wise Analysis
111.22 Over the period from 1977-91, there was an increase in the yield of foodgrains across all zones, though at varying rates. The north-west alluvial plains experienced the highest rate of increase in yield at 2.82%, while the plateau districts had the lowest at 0.96%. For the north-west alluvial plains and east alluvial plains, the rate of increase in yield was similarly high, with annual growth rates of 2.75% and 2.92% respectively. The increase in yield levels began around the mid-eighties in all zones. During the first sub-period, the yield trend increased only in the north-west alluvial plains (1.02%), while the east alluvial plains, south-west alluvial plains, and plateau districts showed declining trends in the range of (-)0.91% to (-)1.58%. In the second sub-period, the trend reversed and accelerated in all four agro-climatic zones, with growth rates ranging from 3.57% to 3.95%. The plateau districts, in particular, saw a notable acceleration in yield from a declining trend of (-)1.58% during the first sub-period to an increasing trend of 3.95% in the second sub-period. Districts showing relatively high growth rates in yield were not necessarily those with high volumes of foodgrains production. Some districts with lesser foodgrains production also showed high growth rates in yield, including East Champaran, Saran, Madhubani, Vaishali, and Aurangabad.

Factors Influencing Growth Performance of Agriculture
111.23 The preceding discussion indicates that agriculture in Bihar, particularly foodgrains, experienced accelerating growth rates from 1984-93. With a decline in area, the growth was largely driven by increases in yield. To ascertain the factors influencing yield increases, a set of factors such as fertilizer consumption per gross cropped hectare, percentage of HYV (High-Yielding Varieties) area, percentage of gross irrigated area to gross cropped area, and percentage deviation of actual rainfall from normal rainfall were regressed on the value of agricultural output per gross cropped hectare for the period from 1976-77 to 1990-91. Details of the methodology for obtaining the value of agricultural output are presented in the methodology section of Chapter-I. Fertilizer consumption and area under HYV seeds were identified as the most significant inputs influencing agricultural yield in Bihar. Irrigation, which remained almost stagnant during the period, did not significantly affect yield levels. Normal rainfall during the period contributed to agricultural growth with stability in the state.

Conclusions
111.24 The study suggests the following broad conclusions:
The growth performance of foodgrains production in Bihar stagnated until 1982-83.
An upward trend began from 1983-84. The growth rate during 1984-93 in Bihar was comparable to agriculturally developed states like Punjab and Haryana, but lagged behind West Bengal.
The increase in foodgrains production was primarily due to rabi foodgrains, as kharif foodgrains production continued to stagnate, similar to the national trend.
Both area and yield contributed to the increase in rabi foodgrains production during the late eighties.
The impact of yield on kharif foodgrains production growth was less impressive compared to rabi foodgrains, and the area under kharif crops showed a shrinking trend.
Rabi foodgrains performance improved due to increased yield in Bihar, though it was still less compared to Punjab, Haryana, and West Bengal.
The south-west plains, followed by the north-west plains, were the main centers of foodgrains production in the state. Districts like Purnea, Rohtas, and Bhojpur had a high share in state foodgrains production.
Zones with dominant shares in foodgrains production also showed high growth rates. However, at the district level, the scenario was different, with districts having lower shares in production also showing relatively high growth rates.
Growth in foodgrains production was stable across different zones/districts, with a low coefficient of variation in the rate of growth. Acceleration in the rate of growth was observed across zones/districts, though there was a concerning acceleration in the declining trend in plateau districts.
The rate of increase in foodgrains yield in Bihar was not comparable to states like Punjab, Haryana, and Uttar Pradesh. However, yield levels in some districts, especially in the south-west plains (e.g., Nalanda, Bhojpur, Patna), compared favorably with other major states.
With stagnant irrigation, inputs like fertilizer and HYV seeds played a more significant role in the accelerated growth process in Bihar agriculture.

Tables
Table III.1
Area, Production, and Yield as well as Trend Growth Rates in Foodgrains Production During 1971-93
Moving average of 3 years ending.
Table III.2
Compound Annual Rate of Growth
Figures in parentheses indicate the level of significance.
Table III.3
Area, Production, and Yield of Foodgrains in Kharif and Rabi Seasons in Major States ('000 tons)
Source: Performance of Agriculture, May 1994, CMIE. CARG: Compound Annual Rate of Growth.

Growth Performance of Major Crops - Temporal and District-Wise Analysis
IV.1 PADDY
i) Production
Trends:
1970-71 to 1990-91: Paddy production increased from 41.54 lakh tonnes to 65.63 lakh tonnes, with an average growth rate of 1.19% per annum.
First Sub-Period (1971-82): The growth rate was low at 0.37% per annum. Production varied from 30.65 lakh tonnes (1982-83) to 56.35 lakh tonnes (1980-81).
Second Sub-Period (1983-91): Production showed a significant increase from around 50.0 lakh tonnes (1983-84) to 65.64 lakh tonnes (1990-91), with a growth rate of 2.59% per annum. However, production fell to 44.60 lakh tonnes (1991-92) and 35.69 lakh tonnes (1992-93) due to low rainfall.
Comparative Analysis:
State Rank (1990-93): Bihar ranked seventh in paddy production with 48.64 lakh tonnes, despite having the second-highest area under paddy.
Production Comparison: Bihar's paddy production was 2.34 times lower than West Bengal and 2.00 times lower than Uttar Pradesh, largely due to lower yield levels. In Andhra Pradesh, the yield was 140% higher than in Bihar.
Regional Pattern (1988-91):
South-West Plains: Produced the most paddy (13.29 lakh tonnes) with relatively less area (8.39 lakh hectares), contributing 33% of state production.
District Contribution: Rohtas (7.40%), Gaya (6.22%), and Bhojpur (5.55%) led in paddy production. In the plateau region, Santhal Parganas (7.27%) and Ranchi (6.24%) were major contributors.
Trend Growth Rates (1977-91):
North-West Alluvial Plains: 0.27%
South-West Alluvial Plains: 0.75%
East Alluvial Plains: -0.50%
Plateau Districts: -2.03% (highest decline)
Growth Trends by Sub-Periods:
First Sub-Period: Declining trends in all zones, with the highest decline in plateau districts (-13.51%) and lowest in North-West Alluvial Plains (-7.82%).
Second Sub-Period: Recovery with increasing trends in all zones, highest in South-West Alluvial Plains (7.09%) and lowest in Plateau Districts (1.77%).
District Performance (1977-91):
High Growth Rates: Gopalganj (2.94%), Siwan (5.41%), Begusarai (6.58%)
Other Notable Districts: Saran (2.48%), Nalanda (1.98%)
ii) Area Under Paddy
Trends:
1971-93: Minimum area was 43.83 lakh ha. (1992-93) and maximum was 55.89 lakh ha. (1977-78). The trend growth rate was negative (-0.15% per annum), but showed positive growth in both sub-periods (0.14% and 0.27%).
Comparative Analysis (1983-93):
Bihar: Shrinkage at -0.57% per annum.
Other States: West Bengal (1.27%), Punjab (5.05%), Andhra Pradesh (0.42%), Madhya Pradesh (0.55%), Uttar Pradesh (0.47%), All-India (0.64%).
Regional Pattern:
Districts with High Area: Rohtas (5.79%), Gaya (5.07%), Bhojpur (3.93%), Ranchi (8.59%), Santhal Parganas (7.28%), East Champaran (4.10%), Purnea (5.13%).
Trend Growth Rates (1977-91):
Declining Trends in All Zones: Plateau Districts (-2.96%), South-West Alluvial Plains (-1.76%), North-West Alluvial Plains (-2.96%), East Alluvial Plains (-1.76%).
First Sub-Period: Decline was highest in North-West Alluvial Plains (-10.18%) and lowest in South-West Alluvial Plains (-6.87%).
Second Sub-Period: Expansion in all zones, highest in South-West Alluvial Plains (2.56%).
District Performance:
High Expansion Rates: Darbhanga (2.39%), Begusarai (5.80%), Saharsa (4.51%), Aurangabad (3.03%), Nalanda (4.45%), Nawadah (4.39%).
iii) Yield of Paddy
Trends:
1970-71 to 1992-93: Yield increased from 0.68 tonnes/ha. (1982-83) to 1.23 tonnes/ha. (1988-89), with an average growth rate of 1.34% per annum.
Sub-Periods: Higher growth rate in the second sub-period (2.32% per annum) compared to the first (0.24%).
Comparative Analysis (1983-93):
Bihar: 1.78% growth in yield, lower than West Bengal (5.17%), Uttar Pradesh (5.02%), Tamil Nadu (4.27%), and Madhya Pradesh (3.62%).
Yield Levels: Punjab (3.293 t/ha.), Tamil Nadu (3.117 t/ha.), Haryana (2.753 t/ha.), All-India average (1.743 t/ha.), Bihar (1.001 t/ha.)
Overall, Bihar’s paddy production showed an increasing trend, but it lags in yield and production compared to other major states. The state witnessed a significant improvement during the second sub-period, although it still struggles with stability and yield compared to its counterparts.

Regional Pattern
IV.1.18
Across different zones/districts, the south-west zone displayed relatively higher yield (1.58 t/ha.) than the north-west plains (1.08 t/ha.) and the plateau districts (0.98 t/ha.). In the latter zones, the yield of paddy was even less than the State average of 1.17 t/ha. Inter-district comparison suggests that districts of south-west plains displayed higher yield of paddy as compared to districts of other zones. It ranged between 2.03 t/ha. in Nalanda and 1.44 t/ha. in Gaya. Among the districts of north-west plains, West Champaran (1.31 t/ha.), followed by Saran (1.26 t/ha.), Siwan (1.22 t/ha.), and Gopalganj (1.21 t/ha.) showed relatively higher yield of paddy. On the other hand, Vaishali (0.81 t/ha.), Samastipur (0.81 t/ha.), Muzaffarpur (0.83 t/ha.), and Darbhanga (0.91 t/ha.) were at the lower end. In the east plains, Bhagalpur (1.43 t/ha.) and Munger (1.41 t/ha.) displayed relatively better yield. Saharsa, on the other hand, with a yield of 0.74 t/ha., lagged far behind. Despite adversaries in terms of climate, districts of plateau zone did not lag behind those in the north-west and east plains as yield level was more or less similar in their cases. Santhal Parganas (1.17 t/ha.) and Giridih (1.12 t/ha.) were way ahead in this respect.
IV.1.19
The trend rates of growth were positive in all the four zones during 1977-91. The rate of increase in yield was relatively high for the north-west alluvial plains (2.81%), followed by the south-west alluvial plains (2.51%). Performance of the east alluvial plains was modest with a rate of increase in yield at 1.67%. For plateau districts, the rate of increase in yield was positive but marginal at 0.93% only.
IV.1.20
Analysing the rate of growth in paddy yield separately for the two sub-periods, it is observed that the north-west alluvial plains showed an increasing trend at 2.36%, while all other zones showed a declining trend during the first sub-period. The rate of decline was as high as (-)5.24% in the zone of plateau districts, followed by (-)4.37% in the south-west alluvial plains. The rate of decline was relatively modest at (-)1.74% in the east alluvial plains. The second sub-period, however, witnessed a reversal to an increasing trend in growth rates in the yield of paddy in all the zones, ranging between 4.53% in the south-west plains and 2.60% in the plateau districts. The rate of increase was modest at 3.55% in east alluvial plains.
IV.1.21
Among the districts, the rate of growth in yield of paddy was relatively high in less dominant paddy-growing districts. Such districts included Madhubani (4.61%), Saran (8.18%), and Siwan (4.12%) in the North-West; Bhagalpur (3.95%) and Munger (7.30%) in the East plains; Patna (5.55%) and Nawadah (10.29%) in the South-West plains; and Hazaribagh (5.96%) and Palamu (6.40%) in the plateau zone. In some of the dominant paddy-growing districts as well, the rate of growth in yield of paddy was high. They included Bhojpur (4.70%), Gaya (4.91%), and Nalanda (7.95%).
Seasonality of Paddy Production
IV.1.22
Area, production, and yield of paddy in three different seasons, i.e., autumn, winter, and summer during 1977-91, were also analysed. It is observed (Table IV.1.3) that winter paddy dominated both in terms of production (88.05%) and area (85.03%) in 1990-91. Autumn paddy was next in importance with a 10.48% share in production and a 13.63% share in the area under paddy in 1990-91. Summer paddy constituted almost an insignificant proportion both in terms of area (1.34%) and production (1.47%). Production of paddy showed an increasing trend in all the seasons during 1977-91. However, the rate of increase was relatively high for autumn (4.08%) and summer (4.08%) paddy. Winter paddy grew at 1.92% per annum during the same period. The share of winter paddy production to total paddy production had a declining trend, albeit marginally, at (-)0.22%, whereas in respect of autumn (1.94%) and summer paddy production (0.95%) the share was increasing during the same period.
IV.1.23
Analysing the area of paddy under different seasons, it is observed that the area of winter paddy showed a declining trend at (-)0.74% during 1977-91. On the other hand, the area of autumn and summer paddy showed an increasing trend at 1.37% and 1.05% respectively during the same period. In terms of yield, summer paddy showed a higher level (1364 kg/ha.), followed by winter paddy (1290 kg/ha.) in 1990-91. For autumn paddy, it was relatively less at 958 kg/ha. Over the years during 1977-91, the rate of increase in yield was again higher for summer paddy (3.03%), followed by autumn paddy (2.71%). For winter paddy, the yield also showed an increasing trend, albeit relatively less at 2.67%.
Regional Pattern
IV.1.24
Analysing the pattern across different zones/districts, it is observed that more than one-third (36.37%) of winter paddy was produced in the south-west plains, with the plateau contributing around one-fourth (24.45%) of the total winter paddy production in the State. In the case of autumn paddy, it was the north-west which produced around two-thirds (62.73%) of the output. Other zones showed negligible presence of autumn paddy cultivation. In summer paddy, the east plains dominated in production. The zone had a share of almost three-fourths (71.60%) in the State's summer paddy production. Analysis of the district-wise pattern suggests that districts such as Gopalganj (12.83%), East Champaran (11.01%), and West Champaran (9.97%) in the north-west; Ranchi (12.07%) in the plateau; and Purnea (8.65%) in the east plains figured prominently in autumn paddy production. In summer paddy production, districts of Katihar (42.46%), Purnea (20.52%), and Saharsa (6.83%) in the east plains; and West Champaran (8.80%) in the north-west plains dominated.
a) Production
IV.1.25
Production of winter paddy showed an increasing trend in the north-west alluvial plains (1.53%), the east alluvial plains (0.97%), and the south-west alluvial plains (2.66%). However, it showed a declining trend in the plateau zone (-0.38%). On the other hand, production of paddy in autumn showed an increasing trend in all the four agro-climatic zones ranging between 4.77% and 0.70%. Production of summer paddy, however, showed a contrasting picture. While the north-west (1.17%) and the east alluvial plains (10.37%) showed an increasing trend, the zones of south-west and plateau districts showed a declining trend. The rate of decline was significantly high at (-)11.98% in the case of south-west alluvial plains and marginal at (-)0.18% for the plateau districts.
IV.1.26
Analysing the trend of growth separately for different seasons across different districts, it is observed that districts of the north-west alluvial plains showed an increasing trend in autumn paddy production. The rate of increase was relatively high in Siwan (8.15%), followed by Gopalganj (7.93%) and Saran (6.77%), all forming one homogenous cluster. Among the districts of the east alluvial plains, Begusarai (20.51%) and Bhagalpur (13.68%) showed a high rate of increase in the production of autumn paddy. On the other hand, Munger and Katihar showed declines at (-)10.00% and (-)4.05% respectively in autumn paddy output. Most of the districts in the south-west alluvial plains showed an increasing trend. Of them, Gaya had the highest rate of increase (9.55%). Amidst such a pattern, however, Aurangabad and Bhojpur, both forming a homogenous cluster, showed a declining trend in autumn paddy output. Performance of districts in the plateau zone was equally impressive with only one district, namely Singhbhum, displaying a declining trend at (-)3.33% in autumn paddy production.

Regional Pattern
IV.1.27
Performance of winter paddy production varied across zones. In the south-west alluvial plains, the trend was increasing, ranging between 4.33% and 0.29%. Conversely, the north-west alluvial plains exhibited a mixed pattern. Districts such as Sitamarhi (-1.56%), Samastipur (-1.79%), Muzaffarpur (-0.23%), and Vaishali (-0.76%) showed a declining trend, forming a cluster. However, districts like Darbhanga, Madhubani, East Champaran, Gopalganj, Saran, Siwan, and West Champaran demonstrated an increasing trend, ranging from 6.86% to 0.49%. In the east alluvial plains, Purnea (-1.30%), Saharsa (-0.40%), and Katihar (-0.35%) experienced a decline, forming a cluster under Koshi Command. In contrast, Bhagalpur, Begusarai, and Munger showed an increasing trend in winter paddy production, ranging between 5.90% and 2.18% per annum. Among the plateau zone districts, Santhal Parganas (-1.01%), Singhbhum (-0.79%), Palamu (-2.66%), and Ranchi (-0.16%) showed a decline, whereas Giridih (2.38%), Hazaribagh (2.03%), and Dhanbad (0.95%) exhibited an increasing trend.
IV.1.28
The increasing trend in summer paddy production at the state level was largely due to the impressive performance of specific districts, as most showed a declining trend. The districts with impressive performance included Darbhanga (6.14%), Madhubani (13.57%), Samastipur (3.14%), Sitamarhi (7.43%), Vaishali (3.20%), and West Champaran (1.05%) in the north-west alluvial plains; Begusarai (6.67%), Katihar (15.36%), and Purnea (17.80%) in the east alluvial plains; and Santhal Parganas (9.56%) and Singhbhum (3.00%) in the plateau zone. Other districts in different agro-climatic zones showed a declining trend, with the rate of decline being significant in the south-west alluvial plains, ranging between (-)25.47% and (-)2.61%. Notable declines in summer paddy output included Gopalganj (-13.01%) and Siwan (-12.07%) in the north-west; Aurangabad (-17.86%), Bhojpur (-25.47%), Gaya (-12.00%), Nalanda (-13.60%), and Patna (-14.16%) in the south-west; and Giridih (-21.47%) and Dhanbad (-15.38%) in the plateau zone.
Area
IV.1.29
The area under autumn paddy showed an increasing trend in the north-west (2.84%) and a marginal increase in the east alluvial plains (0.27%). It declined in the south-west (-1.37%) and plateau zone (-0.52%). The area under winter paddy declined across all zones except the south-west, where it showed a marginal increase of 0.19%. The rate of decline was (-)1.45% in the north-west, (-)0.55% in the east, and (-)1.11% in the plateau zone. The east plains saw a significant gain in summer paddy area (5.90%), while other zones showed a declining trend. The rate of decline in summer paddy area was similar in the north-west and plateau zones at around (-)2.68%.
IV.1.30
District-wise analysis of summer paddy area showed increasing trends in all north-west plains districts, ranging from 6.24% to 0.27%. Districts such as Darbhanga (4.15%), Gopalganj (4.63%), Muzaffarpur (5.65%), Siwan (4.31%), and Vaishali (6.24%) performed impressively. In the east plains, Begusarai (20.37%) and Bhagalpur (14.23%) gained significantly in area, while Munger saw a notable decline at (-)11.92%. In the south-west plains, only Gaya showed an impressive gain in autumn area at 7.23%, whereas Aurangabad and Bhojpur saw significant losses at (-)8.69% and (-)7.49% respectively. In the plateau zone, most districts showed increasing trends in autumn paddy area, with Giridih showing the highest at 3.02%. However, Singhbhum’s high rate of decline at (-)4.12% offset the gains for the zone.
IV.1.31
The district-wise trend in winter paddy area revealed that most north-west districts experienced a decline, ranging from (-)4.08% to (-)0.01%, with Madhubani showing the highest loss at (-)4.08%. Districts showing an increasing trend included Siwan (1.74%), Saran (0.34%), and Muzaffarpur (0.39%), forming one geographical cluster. In the east plains, Begusarai, Bhagalpur, and Saharsa showed increases, while Katihar, Munger, and Purnea declined. Begusarai had the most prominent increase at 4.74%, whereas Purnea had a notable decline. Most districts in the south-west showed increasing trends in winter paddy area, with Aurangabad recording a significant increase of 1.69%. Most plateau zone districts showed declining trends, ranging from (-)1.67% to (-)0.37%.
IV.1.32
Area under summer paddy increased significantly in the east plains, with Begusarai (8.98%), Katihar (10.02%), and Purnea (14.20%) showing notable gains. In the south-west plains, no districts showed an increase. In the plateau zone, only Santhal Parganas showed an increase (5.58%) in summer paddy area. Districts with significant losses in summer paddy area included Gopalganj (-13.94%), Muzaffarpur (-10.81%), and Siwan (-14.80%) in the north-west; Munger (-12.28%) in the east; Aurangabad (-18.12%), Bhojpur (-24.09%), Gaya (-11.86%), Nalanda (-16.18%), Patna (-11.50%), and Rohtas (-13.10%) in the south-east; and Giridih (-20.22%) and Dhanbad (-14.64%) in the plateau zone.
Yield
IV.1.33
Yield of paddy showed an increasing trend across all agro-climatic zones. For some zones, summer paddy demonstrated a greater increase, while for others it was autumn or winter paddy. For summer paddy, yield increased significantly in the east (4.42%), followed by the north-west (3.85%) and plateau zone (2.50%). Autumn paddy yield increased impressively in the plateau zone (2.74%), followed by the south-west (2.07%). For winter paddy, the north-west (2.98%) and south-west (2.47%) showed more impressive performance in yield increase.
IV.1.34
District-wise analysis revealed that most north-west districts showed an increasing trend in autumn paddy yield, ranging from 4.02% to 0.18%. Higher growth rates were recorded in Sitamarhi (4.02%), Saran (3.71%), and Siwan (3.84%). However, Muzaffarpur (-3.33%) and Samastipur (-3.74%) exhibited a declining trend. In the east plains, only Katihar showed a decline in yield (-3.83%), while other districts showed increases ranging from 3.38% to 0.14%, with Purnea, Munger, and Saharsa gaining relatively more. In the south-west plains, all districts showed an increasing trend in yield, ranging from 3.33% to 1.45%. The plateau zone districts showed impressive increases in autumn paddy yield, ranging from 7.67% to 1.40%, with Palamu showing a significant increase of 7.67%. Singhbhum was the only district in this zone to show a decline at (-)1.01%.
IV.1.35
For winter paddy, most districts showed an increase in yield. Notable performers included Madhubani (5.92%) and Siwan (5.12%) in the north-west; Munger (4.91%) in the east plains; Bhojpur (4.03%) and Nalanda (3.97%) in the south-west; and Hazaribagh (2.40%) and Giridih (2.35%) in the plateau zone. Declines in yield were observed in Muzaffarpur (-0.62%) and Samastipur (-1.78%) in the north-west; Saharsa (-0.63%) in the east; and Palamu (-0.99%) in the plateau zone.
IV.1.36
Yield levels for summer paddy increased in most districts across all agro-climatic zones. Impressive performances were noted in West Champaran (6.62%) and Saran (5.64%) in the north-west; Bhagalpur (6.00%) and Katihar (5.34%) in the east; Rohtas (4.47%) in the south-west; and Singhbhum (3.25%) and Santhal Parganas (3.98%) in the plateau zone. However, districts like Begusarai (-2.31%) in the east; Bhojpur (-1.38%), Gaya (-0.14%), and Patna (-2.66%) in the south-west; and Giridih (-1.25%), Ranchi (-2.52%), and Dhanbad (-0.74%) in the plateau zone showed a declining trend.
Conclusions
IV.1.37
The following broad conclusions can be drawn:
Growth Rate: Paddy production grew at 1.19% during 1971-93, with significant fluctuations year to year. The second sub-period saw more growth, but the State lagged behind other major States in terms of production, ranking second in area and seventh in production.
Production Distribution: The south-west plains, covering 24.42% of the area, contributed 33.0% of the paddy production. Districts with higher production included Rohtas, Bhojpur, Santhal Parganas, Ranchi, East Champaran, West Champaran, and Purnea.
Trend Analysis: All zones showed a declining trend in the first sub-period but an increasing trend in the second sub-period. The east plains exhibited higher growth rates, with districts such as Saran, Siwan, Munger, Nalanda, Nawadah, and Palamu showing significant growth.
Area and Yield: The increase in paddy production was primarily due to yield improvements, as the area under paddy shrank. The rate of area shrinkage was similar across zones at around 2.0% to 3.0% per annum during 1977-91. Districts with high area shrinkage included Madhubani, Sitamarhi, Vaishali, West Champaran, Purnea, Patna, Bhojpur, Santhal Parganas, and Singhbhum, while Begusarai and Siwan showed area expansion.
Yield Performance: Yield performance improved notably, especially in the second sub-period (2.32%). Despite this, it lagged behind other paddy-growing States. The north-west and south-west plains showed more impressive yield increases. Madhubani and Munger were prominent for rate of yield increase, while the south-west plains showed high yield levels with districts like Nalanda, Bhojpur, and Patna leading.
Seasonality: Winter paddy was dominant in area and production, but summer paddy exhibited higher yield levels. Autumn and summer paddy showed more impressive increases than winter paddy. Autumn and summer paddy areas increased, while winter paddy areas declined. Summer and autumn paddy also showed better yield growth compared to winter paddy.
Geographical Distribution: Winter paddy was cultivated uniformly across different zones, while summer paddy cultivation was more area-specific in the east plains. The north-west dominated in autumn paddy production, and Ranchi in the plateau zone led in autumn paddy area and production, along with districts like East Champaran, Gopalganj, West Champaran, and Purnea.


Table IV.1.1: Area, Production, and Yield of Paddy, and Trend Growth Rates (1971-1993)
Note: Area and production figures are 3-year moving averages.
Table IV.1.2: Compound Annual Rate of Growth (CARG)
Figures in parentheses indicate the level of significance.
Table IV.1.3: Year-wise Area, Production, and Yield of Paddy in Different Seasons
Note: Significant at 5.0% level.

Maize Data
i) Production of Maize
Table IV.2.1: Production of Maize (1971-93)
Maize production remained relatively stagnant until 1987-88, hovering around 800-900 thousand tonnes. It showed an upward movement from 1988-89, reaching 1326.10 thousand tonnes in 1992-93.
Table IV.2.2: Trend Growth Rate of Maize Production
Regional Pattern
Maize cultivation was concentrated largely in the north-west and east plains, contributing 41.46% and 44.45% respectively of the total maize production in the State. The south-west (3.32%) and plateau (10.37%) zones were less prominent. Notable districts include Samastipur (12.17%), Begusarai (17.98%), and Saharsa (10.85%).
Table IV.2.3: Growth Trend at Zone Level (1977-91)
During the second sub-period, growth accelerated to 5.62% per annum in the east alluvial plains, while it was 1.62% for the north-west alluvial plains. The south-west and plateau zones continued to decline.
Instability in Production
The coefficient of variation in maize production for the State is 11.78%, suggesting relative stability. However, variations are noted across zones and districts. For example, east plains have a coefficient of variation of 15.55%, while the south-west plains have 24.12%.
ii) Area under Maize
Table IV.2.4: Area Under Maize (1970-71 to 1992-93)
The area under maize declined from 990.80 thousand hectares in 1970-71 to 724.70 thousand hectares in 1992-93, with an annual decline rate of -1.83%. The decline was sharper in the second sub-period at -1.42% per annum compared to -0.71% in the first sub-period.
Regional Pattern
High maize production areas also showed high levels of area under maize, though not proportionately. The north-west and east plains occupied 35.36% and 43.26% of the maize area respectively. Major districts include Samastipur (7.88%), Begusarai (14.50%), and Saharsa (9.26%).
Table IV.2.5: Decline in Area Under Maize (1977-91)
The decline in area continued in the second sub-period across all zones, with the south-west alluvial plains showing the highest rate of decline.

Maize
i) Yield of Maize
Table IV.2.11: Yield of Maize (1970-71 to 1992-93)
The yield of maize in the state increased significantly from 1120 kg/ha in 1970-71 to 1830 kg/ha in 1992-93, with a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 3.50% from 1971-93. The growth rate accelerated to 5.15% during the second sub-period compared to 2.25% in the first sub-period. The state’s yield compared favorably with the national average of 1530 kg/ha but was lower than states like Karnataka (2960 kg/ha), West Bengal (2260 kg/ha), and Punjab (2020 kg/ha).
Regional Pattern
North-west Alluvial Plains: Highest yield at 1.88 t/ha
East Plains: 1.64 t/ha
South-west Plains: 1.42 t/ha
Plateau Districts: 0.97 t/ha
District-wise, the highest yield was in Samastipur at 2.47 t/ha, while Begusarai and Saharsa had yields of 1.98 t/ha and 1.87 t/ha respectively.
Table IV.2.12: Growth Trend in Yield (1977-91)
Yield growth accelerated in all zones during the second sub-period, notably in the east alluvial plains (6.37%). Major districts like Begusarai (8.03%) and Saharsa (10.58%) also showed significant yield increases.
ii) Area under Maize
Table IV.2.4: Area Under Maize (1970-71 to 1992-93)
The area under maize declined from 990.80 thousand hectares in 1970-71 to 724.70 thousand hectares in 1992-93, with an annual decline rate of -1.83%. The decline was more pronounced in the second sub-period at -1.42% compared to -0.71% in the first sub-period.
Regional Pattern
North-west Plains: 35.36% of maize area
East Plains: 43.26% of maize area
Table IV.2.5: Decline in Area Under Maize (1977-91)
The decline in maize area was notable in all zones, with the south-west alluvial plains experiencing the highest rate of decline.
Wheat
i) Production of Wheat
Table IV.3.2: Wheat Production (1958-93)
Wheat production grew from 4.12 lakh tonnes in 1958-61 to 35.36 lakh tonnes in 1990-93, with a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 6.90%. The growth rate during 1983-93 was 4.34%, higher than the national average of 3.70%.
Regional Pattern
North-west Plains: 40.93% share of total wheat production
South-west Plains: 35.41% share
East Plains: 21.61% share
Plateau Zone: 2.05% share
Prominent wheat-producing districts include:
North-west: East Champaran, Gopalganj, Saran, Siwan, West Champaran
East Plains: Begusarai, Purnea, Saharsa
South-west Plains: Rohtas, Bhojpur
Table IV.3.5: Growth Trend in Wheat Production (1977-91)
The growth rate improved significantly in the second sub-period, with the north-west and south-west alluvial plains showing rates exceeding 6.0%. The plateau region reversed its declining trend with a growth rate of 2.67%.
Instability in Wheat Production
The coefficient of variation in wheat production was 8.81% overall. It was lower in the north-west (8.34%) and south-west (9.35%) but higher in the plateau zone (16.28%). Districts with high instability included Gopalganj, Samastipur, Sitamarhi, Katihar, and Dhanbad.
Table IV.3.8: Acceleration/Deceleration in Wheat Production
ii) Area under Wheat
Table IV.3.10: Area Under Wheat (1960-61 to 1992-93)
The area under wheat increased from 6.39 lakh hectares in 1960-61 to 19.96 lakh hectares in 1992-93, with a CAGR of 3.59%. The growth rate slowed in the second sub-period to 1.34% from 2.22% in the first sub-period. Bihar's area expansion compares favorably with states like Assam, Gujarat, and Maharashtra, which experienced declines during the 1980s.

IV.2 Maize
IV.2.1 Yield of Maize
The yield of maize in the state showed a significant increase over the years, offsetting the resultant impact of the decline in area on output levels of maize. The yield of maize was 1120 kg/ha in 1970-71, which increased to 1830 kg/ha in 1992-93, registering a compound annual rate of growth of 3.50% during 1971-93. Much of the yield increase was recorded during the second sub-period with a growth rate of 5.15% compared to 2.25% in the first sub-period. The yield level of maize in the state compared well with the national average of 1530 kg/ha but was less compared to states like Karnataka (2960 kg/ha), West Bengal (2260 kg/ha), and Punjab (2020 kg/ha).
IV.2.2 Regional Pattern
Across different zones, the average yield of maize was much higher in the north-west (1.88 t/ha), followed by the east plains (1.64 t/ha). In the south-west, although the area under maize was relatively much less, the yield was fairly high at 1.42 t/ha. The plateau districts lagged far behind with a yield of maize at 0.97 t/ha only. Across districts, it was highest at 2.47 t/ha in Samastipur. In Begusarai and Saharsa, although production of maize and its area was relatively high, they lagged far behind other districts of the north-west in terms of yield. It was 1.98 t/ha in Begusarai and 1.87 t/ha in Saharsa, compared to 2.34 t/ha in Darbhanga, 2.27 t/ha in Madhubani, 2.13 t/ha in East Champaran, and 2.12 t/ha in Muzaffarpur.
IV.2.3 Trend Growth in Yield
Analysis of trend growth in yield showed that the north-west alluvial plains registered the highest growth rate of 4.36% per annum during 1977-91. It was followed by the east alluvial plains with a growth rate of 3.80% and the south-west alluvial plains at 2.43%. The plateau districts showed a growth in yield at 1.94% during this period. Increase in yield showed acceleration in all the zones during the second sub-period; however, more in respect of the east alluvial plains (6.37%). The rate of growth in yield was relatively high in major maize-growing districts such as Begusarai (8.03%) and Saharsa (10.58%) during the second sub-period.
IV.2.4 Conclusions
The following broad conclusions may thus be arrived at:
Production Trends: Production of maize in Bihar remained stagnant till 1987-88 with marginal year-to-year fluctuation. The subsequent period, however, witnessed acceleration in maize production in the state. It was only next to Uttar Pradesh in the volume of maize production. In terms of rate of growth, however, it lagged behind states like Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, and Uttar Pradesh.
Regional Specificity: Maize production was region-specific with the east plains and north-west plains leading in production. Among the districts, Begusarai, followed by Samastipur and Saharsa, dominated in maize production. In terms of growth rate, while the east and north-west plains showed increasing trends, the south-west and plateau zones showed a reverse trend.
Yield Increase: Much of the increase in maize production emanated from increased yield levels, as the area under maize showed a declining trend.
Area Decline: The declining trend in area was noticeable even in the east and the north-west plains, the dominant maize-growing zones.
Yield Improvement: The increase in the yield of maize was observed in all agro-climatic zones. However, it was impressively high in the east and the south-west plains. The districts witnessing impressive increases in maize yield included Madhubani, Muzaffarpur, Siwan, Vaishali, Begusarai, Katihar, Saharsa, Gaya, Nawadah, and Ranchi.
IV.2.5 Tables
Table IV.2.1: Area, Production, and Yield of Maize as Also Trend Growth Rate in Bihar
Table IV.2.2: Compound Annual Rate of Growth
IV.3 Wheat
IV.3.1 Production
Wheat is the second most important cereal food crop for the state, next only to paddy, occupying 21.7% of the GCA and 33.4% of foodgrains output in 1990-93. The trends of growth in production, area, and yield of wheat across different zones/districts are analyzed in the following paragraphs.
Wheat production in the state was 4.12 lakh tonnes during the triennium 1958-61. Over the years, it increased to 12.39 lakh tonnes in 1968-71, 22.31 lakh tonnes in 1978-81, and 35.36 lakh tonnes in 1990-93. Wheat production in the state over three decades thus recorded a compound annual rate of growth of 6.90%. The rate of increase in wheat production during the recent period, i.e., 1983-93, was more impressive (4.34%) compared to the national average of 3.70% per annum. It compares well with major wheat-growing states of Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, and Punjab where the annual compound growth rate of production during the same period was recorded at 5.68%, 3.56%, and 3.79%, respectively.
Analyzing wheat production from 1970-71 to 1992-93, it is observed that wheat production in the state remained by and large stagnant, hovering around 24 lakh tonnes up to 1982-83. The year 1983-84 was a landmark for wheat production when it exceeded 29 lakh tonnes. It continued to rise since, touching 35.60 lakh tonnes in 1990-91. The trend rate of growth was 3.28% per annum for the period 1971-93. Between the two sub-periods, it was relatively high (3.50%) for the second sub-period and low (2.72%) for the first sub-period.
IV.3.2 Regional Pattern
Across different zones, the north-west plains (40.93%), followed by the south-west plains (35.41%), dominated in wheat production. The east plains had a share of 21.61% in the total wheat production of the state. It was almost absent in the plateau zone with a share of 2.05% only. District-wise analysis suggests that production of wheat was by and large evenly spread among the districts of the north-west. However, in districts such as East Champaran (5.65%), Gopalganj (5.65%), Saran (5.44%), Siwan (5.27%), and West Champaran (4.00%), cultivation of wheat was relatively more dominant. Among the districts of the east plains, Begusarai (5.95%), Purnea (4.28%), and Saharsa (4.40%) emerged prominently in wheat production. Among the districts of the south-west plains, wheat cultivation was more widespread with a relatively high share in the state’s total wheat production. However, Rohtas followed by Bhojpur was found to be the main wheat granary of the state with a share of 9.92% and 7.43%, respectively.
IV.3.3 Trend Rate of Growth
Analyzing the trend rate of growth, it is observed that during the first sub-period (1977-91), growth rate in wheat production in different zones was varied. It was highest in the north-west alluvial plains (3.68%) followed by the south-west alluvial plains (4.16%). The east alluvial plains had a growth rate of 2.66%, and the plateau region showed a decline of -2.77% per annum. The north-west and south-west alluvial plains showed a comparatively higher growth rate than the east alluvial plains and plateau regions. The rate of increase in production of wheat during the second sub-period (1983-91) in the north-west alluvial plains and south-west alluvial plains was comparatively high at 5.0% and 4.8%, respectively.
IV.3.4 Instability in Wheat Production
The coefficient of variation in wheat production in Bihar for the period 1971-93 was 8.81%. The coefficient of variation was higher in the plateau region (16.28%) and relatively lower in the north-west (8.34%) and south-west (9.35%) alluvial plains. District-wise, instability was higher in Gopalganj, Samastipur, Sitamarhi, Katihar, and Dhanbad.
IV.3.5 Acceleration/Deceleration in Wheat Production
The rate of acceleration in wheat production during 1977-91 varied across zones:
North-west Alluvial Plains: 0.39% per annum
South-west Alluvial Plains: 0.17% per annum
Plateau: 0.44% per annum
East Alluvial Plains: 0.09% per annum
IV.3.6 Area Under Wheat
The area under wheat expanded from 6.39 lakh hectares in 1960-61 to 19.96 lakh hectares in 1992-93, recording a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 3.59%. The growth rate in area was relatively high at 2.22% per annum during 1960-61 to 1982-83 but showed a slowdown to 1.34% per annum during 1983-93. Bihar's area expansion in wheat cultivation was significantly higher compared to states like Assam, Gujarat, and Maharashtra, which experienced a decline in the area under wheat during the 1980s.
IV.3.7 Regional Pattern
Across different zones, the north-west (39.25%) and south-west (34.16%) showed relatively high area under wheat. Districts such as Rohtas (9.99%), Bhojpur (7.11%), and Gaya (4.79%) in the south-west; Purnea (5.26%), Saharsa (5.22%), and Begusarai (5.04%) in the east; and East Champaran (5.05%), Gopalganj (4.80%), Saran (4.70%), and Siwan (4.71%) in the north-west had relatively high proportions of the total wheat area in the state.
IV.3.8 Trend in Area Under Wheat
In the first sub-period, all agro-climatic zones of Bihar, except the south-west plains, showed a declining trend in area under wheat. The rate of decline was as high as -6.30% in the plateau zones. In the north-west and east plains, the rate of decline was -1.60% and -1.30%, respectively. The south-west plains showed an increasing trend at 1.90% per annum. In the second sub-period, all zones showed an increased trend in area under wheat, with the east plains showing the highest increase at 3.39%, followed by the north-west (2.45%) and south-west (2.28%) plains. The plateau zone also showed a marginal increase of 0.07%. The plateau zone’s reversal from a declining rate to an increasing trend in area under wheat was a significant development. Growth in area was relatively high in districts less dominant in wheat production, including Begusarai (5.80%), Purnea (6.43%), Darbhanga (4.38%), Sitamarhi (4.85%), Nalanda (5.37%), and Hazaribagh (5.56%).
IV.3.9 Yield of Wheat
Part of the increase in wheat production in the state could be attributed to an impressive increase in yield. The yield increased from 644 kg/ha in 1958-61 to 1790 kg/ha in 1990-93, recording a compound annual rate of growth of 3.2%. The yield during the first sub-period showed increasing trends but with wide year-to-year fluctuations, hovering around 1250 kg/ha. The second sub-period showed a more stable and consistent increase in yield, reaching 1820 kg/ha in 1991-92. The trend rate of growth in yield of wheat for the period 1971-93 was 1.77% per annum. The pace of increase in yield became faster during the second sub-period at 2.19% per annum compared to 0.46% per annum during the first sub-period.
IV.3.10 Regional Pattern
Despite the accelerated rate of growth, the yield of wheat in Bihar at 1790 kg/ha in 1990-93 was below the national average of 2330 kg/ha. It was much less than the yield level in Haryana (3570 kg/ha) and Punjab (3760 kg/ha). The pace of increase in yield level also lagged behind in Bihar, with a growth rate of 2.80% per annum during 1983-93 compared to the national average of 3.14%. Haryana showed a faster pace of increase at 4.0% per annum during the same period.
IV.3.11 Trend in Yield of Wheat
Across different zones, the average yield of wheat was similar in the north-west and south-west plains at 1.79 t/ha and 1.78 t/ha, respectively. Districts such as Patna (2.22 t/ha) and Nalanda (2.14 t/ha) in the south-west; Samastipur (2.10 t/ha) and Gopalganj (2.02 t/ha) in the north-west; and Begusarai (2.02 t/ha) in the east plains showed relatively high yield levels of wheat. Districts with yields higher than the state average (1.71 t/ha) included East Champaran (1.92 t/ha), Saran (1.98 t/ha), and Siwan (1.92 t/ha) in the north-west; and Bhojpur (1.79 t/ha) and Nawadah (1.76 t/ha) in the south-west plains.
IV.3.12 Rate of Growth in Yield
The increase in yield of wheat was experienced across all agro-climatic zones, albeit at varying rates. The highest growth rate was 2.73% per annum in the north-west alluvial plains, followed by 2.51% in the south-west alluvial plains during 1977-91. The east alluvial plains had a growth rate of 1.33%, and the plateau region showed a low trend growth rate of 0.13%. From the mid-eighties, even the plateau districts experienced impressive increases in yield levels. The plateau region reversed from a declining trend rate of -3.90% in the first sub-period to an increasing trend of 2.60% per annum during the second sub-period. The rate of increase in yield was more impressive in other agro-climatic zones, particularly in the south-west alluvial plains (4.15%) and the north-west alluvial plains (3.62%) during the second sub-period. The east alluvial plains lagged behind with a growth rate of 0.92%. In various districts, the rate of growth in yield of wheat was relatively high in less dominant wheat-growing districts such as Munger (4.72%), Nawadah (6.51%), Patna (5.27%), and Hazaribagh (6.46%).
IV.3.13 Conclusions
The following broad conclusions are thus arrived at:
Production: Wheat production in the state showed impressive acceleration, particularly during the second sub-period. Much of the increase in production was due to yield improvement, although area expansion also contributed significantly.
Regional Distribution: The north-west (40.93%) and south-west (35.41%) zones had a large share in wheat production. Prominent districts in wheat production included Rohtas (9.92%), Bhojpur (7.43%), Begusarai (5.95%), East Champaran (5.65%), Gopalganj (5.65%), Saran (5.44%), and Siwan (5.27%).
Growth Rates: The growth rates in wheat production were impressive in both the north-west and south-west plains. Districts such as West Champaran, Begusarai, and Nalanda showed growth rates comparable to the national average and other major wheat-growing states.
High Growth Districts: During the second sub-period, districts such as East Champaran, Sitamarhi, Nalanda, Nawadah, Hazaribagh, and Palamu showed growth rates exceeding 8.0%.
Area vs. Yield: In districts like Darbhanga, Sitamarhi, Begusarai, and Purnea, increases in wheat production were largely due to area expansion. Conversely, in districts such as East Champaran, Sitamarhi, Gaya, Nawadah, Patna, Hazaribagh, and Palamu, increases were mainly due to yield improvements.
Yield Levels: Several districts, including Gopalganj, Samastipur, Begusarai, Nalanda, and Patna, had average wheat yields close to the national average but still fell short compared to Haryana and Punjab.

IV.3. Wheat
Area, Production, and Yield Trends
Area, Production, and Yield Data (1970-71 to 1992-93):

Compound Annual Rate of Growth (CARG):

Key Insights:
Overall Growth: Significant increase in area and production of wheat with steady improvements in yield.
First Sub-period (1970-71 to 1982-83): Higher growth rates in area (2.22%) and production (2.72%) but slower yield growth (0.46%).
Second Sub-period (1983-84 to 1992-93): Moderate area growth (1.34%) but higher production growth (3.50%) and improved yield growth (2.19%).
Regional Patterns and Trends:
Area and Production Distribution:
The north-west and south-west zones had the highest share in wheat production and area. Significant production was observed in districts such as Rohtas, Bhojpur, Gaya, Purnea, and Begusarai.
Yield Trends:
Yield increased significantly across all zones, with the plateau region showing a marked turnaround in yield growth during the second sub-period.
IV.4. Arhar
Production Trends:
Production Data (1970-71 to 1992-93):
1970-71: 134.6 thousand tonnes
1992-93: 73.7 thousand tonnes
Growth Rate: -0.61% per annum (overall), with sharper declines in the first sub-period (-4.07%) compared to the second (-2.21%).
Regional Pattern:
The north-west plains were the major arhar-producing zone, followed by the plateau and south-west plains. Significant production in districts like Palamu, Ranchi, Rohtas, and West Champaran.
Growth Trends:
1977-91: The east alluvial plains experienced a decline of -2.70% per annum, while the plateau and south-west plains showed increasing trends.
First Sub-period: Decreasing trends in arhar production in most zones.
Second Sub-period: Reversal in trends in the south-west and plateau zones, with declining trends in the north-west and east alluvial plains.
Area Trends:
Area Data (1970-71 to 1992-93):
1970-71: 150.3 thousand hectares
1992-93: 63.3 thousand hectares
Growth Rate: -3.40% per annum (overall), with sharper declines in the first sub-period (-4.78%) compared to the second (-3.21%).
Regional Pattern:
Plateau Zone: Leading in terms of area, followed by the south-west plains.
Significant Districts: Ranchi and Palamu in the plateau zone, Rohtas, Gaya, and Bhojpur in the south-west.
Growth Trends:
1977-91: High rate of decline in the east and south-west zones.
Second Sub-period: Notable increases in area in districts like Rohtas and Patna, while dominant arhar-producing districts experienced shrinkage.
Conclusions:
Wheat:
Notable improvements in both production and yield over time.
Regional disparities exist, with high growth rates in north-west and south-west zones.
Yield improvements are evident but still lag behind major wheat-producing states like Haryana and Punjab.
Arhar:
Declining trends in both production and area over the years.
Regional variations in growth trends with some zones showing positive changes.
Concern over the lagging growth compared to other major arhar-producing states and increasing area at the national level.
This structured approach should help in understanding the trends and patterns in wheat and arhar production and area over the specified periods.

IV.4 Arhar
IV.4.11 Yield of Arhar
There was an impressive increase in the yield level of arhar in Bihar. Yield per hectare was 960 kg in 1970-71, which declined until 1978-79 but started moving in an upward direction since then, reaching the peak level at 1380 kg/ha in 1991-92. The trend growth rate in arhar production was observed to be 2.87% per annum during 1971-93. Analysis of the trend rates of growth in two sub-periods suggests that while it showed an increasing trend in both sub-periods, it was marginally higher at 1.00% in the second sub-period as against 0.90% in the first sub-period. Comparing the yield level of arhar in Bihar with that of the national average and those of major states, it was found to be impressive for the State. For example, it was 640 kg/ha as the all-India average, 1110 kg/ha for Uttar Pradesh, 450 kg/ha for Maharashtra, 870 kg/ha for Madhya Pradesh, and 1260 kg/ha for Bihar in 1990-93. Moreover, while it declined annually by (-0.48%) for India as a whole, (-1.41%) in Uttar Pradesh, and (-1.37%) in Maharashtra, it increased by 1.93% annually in Bihar during 1983-93.
IV.4.12 Regional Pattern
Analysis of the regional pattern in Arhar yield revealed that zones/districts with high levels of arhar production and area did not necessarily have high yields. It was relatively high in the north-west (1.32 t/ha) and the south-west (1.31 t/ha) plains. The zone of plateau districts, on the other hand, showed relatively low levels of arhar yield (0.77 t/ha). Districts showing high yield of arhar included:
North-West: Siwan (1.65 t/ha), Darbhanga (1.47 t/ha), West Champaran (1.46 t/ha), and Madhubani (1.39 t/ha)
East: Katihar (1.42 t/ha), Purnea (1.38 t/ha), and Saharsa (1.34 t/ha)
South-West: Nalanda (1.46 t/ha) and Patna (1.44 t/ha)
Plateau Zone: Santhal Parganas (1.39 t/ha)
IV.4.13 Trend Rates of Growth
Trend rates of growth in the yield of arhar were impressive in all agro-climatic zones during 1977-91. It was relatively high in the south-west alluvial plains (5.36%), plateau districts (6.25%), and north-west alluvial plains (4.34%). East alluvial plains experienced a relatively low rate of yield increase at 2.49%. Analyzing the trend growth rates for two sub-periods separately, it is observed that it was uniformly high in all the agro-climatic zones in the first sub-period, ranging between 7.68% and 6.74%. The second sub-period, however, experienced a reversal to a declining trend in respect of the north-west alluvial plains (-1.08%) and the east alluvial plains (-1.74%). The south-west alluvial plains and the plateau zone continued to show increasing trends even in the second sub-period but at reduced rates at 0.24% and 3.02%, respectively. Across different districts, the rate of growth in the yield of arhar was relatively high in less dominant arhar growing districts such as:
Madhubani (15.60%)
Patna (5.21%)
Santhal Parganas (9.82%)
Singhbhum (4.72%)
IV.4.14 Conclusions
Based on the foregoing discussions, the following conclusions emerge:
Production of arhar witnessed significant reversal in Bihar. The rate of reversal, however, slackened in the second sub-period.
Much of the decline in arhar production in the State was due to area shrinkage.
The yield of arhar was relatively high in Bihar compared to other states and the all-India average.
Production of arhar was region-specific, largely in the north-west plains with districts of Siwan, Saran, and Gopalganj contributing a major share. Palamu and Ranchi in the plateau zone also showed a higher share in arhar production.
All these districts showed a declining trend in arhar production, especially in the second sub-period. With prices of arhar increasing fast and production of arhar showing an increasing trend at the all-India level, the reversal in Bihar becomes a matter of concern.
Table IV.4.1
Area, Production, and Yield as also Trend Growth Rates of Arhar in Bihar during 1971-93
Table IV.4.2
Compound Annual Rate of Growth
Figures in parentheses indicate the level of significance.

IV.5 Gram
IV.5.1 Production
The production of gram has been consistently declining in the state over the years. It was as high as 174.20 thousand tonnes in 1970-71, which declined to 123.90 thousand tonnes in 1981-82. It, however, recorded an upward movement in subsequent years but never reached the base level of 1970-71. During the eighties, the annual production of gram hovered around 140 to 160 thousand tonnes. The index number came down to its lowest at 56 in 1992-93. The trend rate of growth for the period 1971-93 showed a declining trend at (-0.25%). It showed a declining trend in both sub-periods. It was more sharp at (-2.09%) per annum during the first sub-period. The declining trend narrowed in the second sub-period at (-1.05%) per annum, due to wider application of HYV seeds/pesticides technology in particular. Bihar occupied sixth position in its production (135.7 thousand tonnes in 1990-93) with states such as Madhya Pradesh (1778.13 thousand tonnes), Uttar Pradesh (994.77 thousand tonnes), and Rajasthan (827.90 thousand tonnes) way ahead of Bihar. Declining trends in the production of gram were the general pattern across major gram growing states, except Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka, and Andhra Pradesh. In these states, it showed an increasing trend ranging between 6.18% and 1.18% during 1983-93. Among the major gram growing states, the rate of decline was relatively high in Haryana (-1.28%), Uttar Pradesh (-2.24%), and Rajasthan (-3.17%) during the same period.
IV.5.2 Regional Pattern
Across different zones, the south-west plains alone produced three-fifths (61.09%) of gram in the State. The share of other zones was much less at 18.76% for the east plains, 11.07% for the plateau districts, and 9.08% for the north-west plains. Among the districts, Patna (14.77%), Bhojpur (14.21%), and Rohtas (13.37%) were the major gram growing centers in the State, producing two-fifths of the State gram production. Other districts with relatively high shares of gram production included:
Plateau: Palamu (5.02%)
South-West Plains: Nalanda (6.28%) and Gaya (6.03%)
East: Munger (9.59%) and Bhagalpur (5.37%)
North-West Plains: Darbhanga (2.27%) and Siwan (1.70%)
IV.5.3 Trend Growth Rates
Analysis of trend growth rates in the production of gram for the period 1977-91 revealed that the south-west alluvial plains had an increasing trend in gram production (2.03%) during 1977-91. The east alluvial plains experienced a relatively high rate of increase at 4.91%. However, the north-west and plateau zones experienced declining trends in gram production at (-1.53%) and (-2.72%), respectively. Among districts, high growth rates in gram production were observed in less dominant gram growing districts such as:
Nalanda (23.94%)
Patna (8.21%)
Munger (6.76%)
Bhagalpur (5.48%)
IV.5.4 Conclusions
Based on the above discussion, the following conclusions can be drawn:
The production of gram showed a declining trend over the years in Bihar, with a sharp decline observed in the first sub-period. The declining trend continued in the second sub-period but at a reduced rate.
The yield of gram was relatively high in the south-west and east alluvial plains as compared to the north-west and plateau zones.
Major gram growing districts included Patna, Bhojpur, and Rohtas, contributing a significant share of the state's gram production.
The declining trend in gram production was more pronounced in states like Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, and Rajasthan, whereas it showed an increasing trend in Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka, and Andhra Pradesh.
Despite the decreasing trend, gram remains an important crop in Bihar, with substantial production concentrated in specific districts.
Table IV.5.1
Area, Production, and Yield as also Trend Growth Rates of Gram in Bihar during 1971-93
Table IV.5.2
Compound Annual Rate of Growth
Figures in parentheses indicate the level of significance.

IV.5 Gram
IV.5.1 Production
The production of gram has been consistently declining in the state over the years. It was as high as 174.20 thousand tonnes in 1970-71, which declined to 123.90 thousand tonnes in 1981-82. It, however, recorded an upward movement in subsequent years but never reached the base level of 1970-71. During the eighties, the annual production of gram hovered around 140 to 160 thousand tonnes. The index number came down to its lowest at 56 in 1992-93. The trend rate of growth for the period 1971-93 showed a declining trend at (-0.25%). It showed a declining trend in both sub-periods. It was more sharp at (-2.09%) per annum during the first sub-period. The declining trend narrowed in the second sub-period at (-1.05%) per annum, due to wider application of HYV seeds/pesticides technology in particular. Bihar occupied sixth position in its production (135.7 thousand tonnes in 1990-93) with states such as Madhya Pradesh (1778.13 thousand tonnes), Uttar Pradesh (994.77 thousand tonnes), and Rajasthan (827.90 thousand tonnes) way ahead of Bihar. Declining trends in the production of gram were the general pattern across major gram growing states, except Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka, and Andhra Pradesh. In these states, it showed an increasing trend ranging between 6.18% and 1.18% during 1983-93. Among the major gram growing states, the rate of decline was relatively high in Haryana (-1.28%), Uttar Pradesh (-2.24%), and Rajasthan (-3.17%) during the same period.
IV.5.2 Regional Pattern
Across different zones, the south-west plains alone produced three-fifths (61.09%) of gram in the State. The share of other zones was much less at 18.76% for the east plains, 11.07% for the plateau districts, and 9.08% for the north-west plains. Among the districts, Patna (14.77%), Bhojpur (14.21%), and Rohtas (13.37%) were the major gram growing centers in the State, producing two-fifths of the State gram production. Other districts with relatively high shares of gram production included:
Plateau: Palamu (5.02%)
South-West Plains: Nalanda (6.28%) and Gaya (6.03%)
East: Munger (9.59%) and Bhagalpur (5.37%)
North-West Plains: Darbhanga (2.27%) and Siwan (1.70%)
IV.5.3 Trend Growth Rates
Analysis of trend growth rates in the production of gram for the period 1977-91 revealed that the south-west alluvial plains had an increasing trend in gram production (2.03%) during 1977-91. In other zones, viz. north-west alluvial plains, east alluvial plains, and plateau regions, it showed a declining trend at (-2.26%), (-1.08%), and (-0.90%), respectively. The declining trend became sharp in respect of the north-west alluvial plains from (-0.10%) in the first sub-period to (-4.21%) in the second sub-period. Declining trend continued to be sharp at (-2.96%) during the second sub-period as against (-2.82%) during the first sub-period in respect of the east plains. In the case of the south-west plains, it reversed to a declining trend at (-0.56%) in the second sub-period from an increasing trend at 0.49% during the first sub-period. The growth rate further decelerated from (-0.90%) in the first sub-period to (-2.12%) in the second sub-period in the plateau zone. Across different districts, the rate of growth in gram production was relatively high in:
Darbhanga (2.69%)
Aurangabad (4.39%)
Nawadah (4.59%)
Major gram growing districts such as Palamu, Santhal Parganas, and Rohtas showed a reversal in the growth rate of gram output.
IV.5.4 Instability Analysis
The production of gram in the State was observed to decline with a coefficient of variation at 9.87% only. Across different zones, the south-west plains alone showed a stable increase in gram production with a coefficient of variation at 12.95% only. However, in respect of the plateau districts, the declining trend in gram production showed high fluctuation, as the coefficient of variation was high at 25.99%. On the other hand, the declining trend in respect of the north-west and the east plains was more stable with a coefficient of variation at 15.66% and 12.55%, respectively. Across major gram growing districts, the increasing trend was more stable in Patna with a coefficient of variation at 13.96% only. But it was relatively more unstable in the case of Bhojpur (24.17%) and Rohtas (20.59%). In Palamu and Darbhanga, the rate of increase was not stable, as the coefficient of variation was high at 42.40% and 37.24%, respectively. Bhagalpur too was a major gram growing district. In its case, however, the production of gram showed a declining trend (-1.19%) with low fluctuation, as the coefficient of variation was 12.80% only.
IV.5.5 Analysis of Acceleration/Deceleration
The declining trend in gram production of the State was observed to be decelerating (-0.06%). The increasing trend in the south-west plains was found to decelerate (-0.03%). The declining trend in respect of the north-west (-0.22%), east plains (-0.08%), and plateau districts (-0.05%) was also decelerating. Among the major gram growing districts, the increasing trend was found to be accelerating only in:
Patna (0.65%)
Palamu (0.92%)
Darbhanga (0.51%)
In the case of Bhojpur (-0.23%) and Rohtas (-0.25%), the increasing trend was observed to be decelerating. In Bhagalpur, the declining trend was found to be decelerating (-0.24%).
IV.5.6 Area under Gram
The area under gram showed a sharp shrinkage in the state. It was as high as 244.40 thousand hectares in 1970-71, which increased initially to 266.60 thousand hectares in 1972-73, but continued to decline thereafter, reaching the lowest level at 124.30 thousand hectares in 1992-93, with an index number at 51 points only. The trend growth rate was observed to be declining at (-2.40%) per annum during 1971-93. The rate of decline was almost uniform in both sub-periods. It was (-2.59%) in the first sub-period and (-2.40%) in the second sub-period.
IV.5.7 Inter-State Comparison
Inter-state comparison of area under gram suggests that Bihar was way behind other states, holding the seventh position in the country. While it occupied 2333.43 thousand ha in Madhya Pradesh and 1376.80 thousand ha in Rajasthan, it was a mere 146.90 thousand ha in Bihar during 1990-93. It formed only 2.25% of the gram area of the country. Comparing the trend rates of growth with major gram growing states, it is observed that the rate of decline in area was relatively low in Bihar. For example, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, and Karnataka, the major gram growing states, showed expansion in gram area at 1.18%, 2.50%, and 4.01% per annum during 1983-93. Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, and Haryana, on the other hand, showed shrinkage in gram area at (-2.89%), (-1.73%), and (-5.22%) per annum, respectively, as against (-2.37%) in Bihar during the same period.
IV.5.8 Regional Pattern
In terms of area, the south-west plains dominated with a share of 54.17% in the State gram area. Districts with relatively high area under gram included:
South-West Plains: Bhojpur (11.79%), Patna (10.23%), and Rohtas (13.35%)
Plateau: Palamu (7.39%) and Santhal Parganas (3.14%)
East: Munger (9.59%) and Bhagalpur (6.60%)
North-West Plains: Darbhanga (2.36%), Saran (1.60%), and Siwan (1.45%)
IV.5.9 Trend Growth Rates in Area
Further, shrinkage in area under gram was observed in all the four agro-climatic zones, however, varying from a high rate of decline at (-4.40%) in the north-west alluvial plains to a low of (-1.51%) in the south-west alluvial plains. The zone of plateau districts showed equally high levels of shrinkage at (-3.91%) during this period. East alluvial plains, on the other hand, showed a modest rate of shrinkage at (-2.43%). Between the two sub-periods, the second sub-period witnessed a slackened rate of decline in the north-west and plateau zone. In the case of the east plains, the rate of decline accelerated in the second sub-period to (-10.53%). The south-west plains, however, experienced a reversal from a declining trend in the first sub-period to an increasing trend in the second sub-period. Across different districts, the rate of growth in gram area was positive in select districts only, viz:
Nalanda (0.10%)
Nawadah (1.17%)
Giridih (0.65%)
These were the districts with less dominance in its production. Districts with dominant gram production showed shrinkage in their area.
IV.5.10 Yield of Gram
There has been a definite increase in the yield of gram over these years in Bihar. It was 0.71 thousand tonnes/ha in 1970-71, which declined initially to reach the lowest level at 0.44 thousand tonnes/ha in 1973-74 but showed an increasing trend thereafter, reaching the maximum level of 1.02 tonnes/ha in 1991-92 with an index number reaching 143 points. The trend rate of growth during 1971-93 thus showed an increase at 2.14% per annum. Analysis of the trend rates of growth in two sub-periods suggests that although it showed an increasing trend in both periods, the rate of increase was higher during the second sub-period (1.35%) than the first sub-period (0.48%).
IV.5.11 Comparative Yield
Comparing the yield level across major gram growing states, it is encouraging to observe that Bihar figured at the top with a yield level of 0.91 tonnes/ha during 1990-93 as against 0.87 tonnes/ha in Uttar Pradesh, 0.61 tonnes/ha in Rajasthan, 0.50 tonnes/ha in Maharashtra, 0.76 tonnes/ha in Madhya Pradesh, and 0.68 tonnes/ha in Haryana. In terms of growth as well, it showed an encouraging picture for Bihar. It grew annually at 2.22% in Bihar, 1.57% in Madhya Pradesh, and 0.59% in Uttar Pradesh during 1983-93. In Rajasthan, it showed a declining trend at (-1.36%). However, Maharashtra and Haryana showed better performance with yield levels growing annually at around 3.30% during the same period.
IV.5.12 Yield by Zone and District
Across different zones, the south-west plains with high production of gram also showed a high yield level of gram at 0.98 t/ha. The zone of plateau districts had the least yield at 0.83 t/ha. Further, districts showing high levels of gram production also showed high levels of yield of gram. They included:
South-West: Patna (1.25 t/ha.) and Bhojpur (1.04 t/ha.)
North-West: Siwan (1.02 t/ha.)
East: Begusarai (0.95 t/ha.)
Plateau: Santhal Parganas (0.77 t/ha.) and Palamu (0.74 t/ha.)
IV.5 Gram
IV.5.1 Production
The production of gram has been consistently declining in the state over the years. It was as high as 174.20 thousand tonnes in 1970-71, which declined to 123.90 thousand tonnes in 1981-82. It, however, recorded an upward movement in subsequent years but never reached the base level of 1970-71. During the eighties, the annual production of gram hovered around 140 to 160 thousand tonnes. The index number came down to its lowest at 56 in 1992-93. The trend rate of growth for the period 1971-93 showed a declining trend at (-0.25%). It showed a declining trend in both sub-periods. It was more sharp at (-2.09%) per annum during the first sub-period. The declining trend narrowed in the second sub-period at (-1.05%) per annum, due to wider application of HYV seeds/pesticides technology in particular. Bihar occupied sixth position in its production (135.7 thousand tonnes in 1990-93) with states such as Madhya Pradesh (1778.13 thousand tonnes), Uttar Pradesh (994.77 thousand tonnes), and Rajasthan (827.90 thousand tonnes) way ahead of Bihar. Declining trends in the production of gram were the general pattern across major gram growing states, except Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka, and Andhra Pradesh. In these states, it showed an increasing trend ranging between 6.18% and 1.18% during 1983-93. Among the major gram growing states, the rate of decline was relatively high in Haryana (-1.28%), Uttar Pradesh (-2.24%), and Rajasthan (-3.17%) during the same period.
IV.5.2 Regional Pattern
Across different zones, the south-west plains alone produced three-fifths (61.09%) of gram in the State. The share of other zones was much less at 18.76% for the east plains, 11.07% for the plateau districts, and 9.08% for the north-west plains. Among the districts, Patna (14.77%), Bhojpur (14.21%), and Rohtas (13.37%) were the major gram growing centers in the State, producing two-fifths of the State gram production. Other districts with relatively high shares of gram production included:
Plateau: Palamu (5.02%)
South-West Plains: Nalanda (6.28%) and Gaya (6.03%)
East: Munger (9.59%) and Bhagalpur (5.37%)
North-West Plains: Darbhanga (2.27%) and Siwan (1.70%)
IV.5.3 Trend Growth Rates
Analysis of trend growth rates in the production of gram for the period 1977-91 revealed that the south-west alluvial plains had an increasing trend in gram production (2.03%) during 1977-91. In other zones, viz. north-west alluvial plains, east alluvial plains, and plateau regions, it showed a declining trend at (-2.26%), (-1.08%), and (-0.90%), respectively. The declining trend became sharp in respect of the north-west alluvial plains from (-0.10%) in the first sub-period to (-4.21%) in the second sub-period. Declining trend continued to be sharp at (-2.96%) during the second sub-period as against (-2.82%) during the first sub-period in respect of the east plains. In the case of the south-west plains, it reversed to a declining trend at (-0.56%) in the second sub-period from an increasing trend at 0.49% during the first sub-period. The growth rate further decelerated from (-0.90%) in the first sub-period to (-2.12%) in the second sub-period in the plateau zone. Across different districts, the rate of growth in gram production was relatively high in:
Darbhanga (2.69%)
Aurangabad (4.39%)
Nawadah (4.59%)
Major gram growing districts such as Palamu, Santhal Parganas, and Rohtas showed a reversal in the growth rate of gram output.
IV.5.4 Instability Analysis
The production of gram in the State was observed to decline with a coefficient of variation at 9.87% only. Across different zones, the south-west plains alone showed a stable increase in gram production with a coefficient of variation at 12.95% only. However, in respect of the plateau districts, the declining trend in gram production showed high fluctuation, as the coefficient of variation was high at 25.99%. On the other hand, the declining trend in respect of the north-west and the east plains was more stable with a coefficient of variation at 15.66% and 12.55%, respectively. Across major gram growing districts, the increasing trend was more stable in Patna with a coefficient of variation at 13.96% only. But it was relatively more unstable in the case of Bhojpur (24.17%) and Rohtas (20.59%). In Palamu and Darbhanga, the rate of increase was not stable, as the coefficient of variation was high at 42.40% and 37.24%, respectively. Bhagalpur too was a major gram growing district. In its case, however, the production of gram showed a declining trend (-1.19%) with low fluctuation, as the coefficient of variation was 12.80% only.
IV.5.5 Analysis of Acceleration/Deceleration
The declining trend in gram production of the State was observed to be decelerating (-0.06%). The increasing trend in the south-west plains was found to decelerate (-0.03%). The declining trend in respect of the north-west (-0.22%), east plains (-0.08%), and plateau districts (-0.05%) was also decelerating. Among the major gram growing districts, the increasing trend was found to be accelerating only in:
Patna (0.65%)
Palamu (0.92%)
Darbhanga (0.51%)
In the case of Bhojpur (-0.23%) and Rohtas (-0.25%), the increasing trend was observed to be decelerating. In Bhagalpur, the declining trend was found to be decelerating (-0.24%).
IV.5.6 Area under Gram
The area under gram showed a sharp shrinkage in the state. It was as high as 244.40 thousand hectares in 1970-71, which increased initially to 266.60 thousand hectares in 1972-73, but continued to decline thereafter, reaching the lowest level at 124.30 thousand hectares in 1992-93, with an index number at 51 points only. The trend growth rate was observed to be declining at (-2.40%) per annum during 1971-93. The rate of decline was almost uniform in both sub-periods. It was (-2.59%) in the first sub-period and (-2.40%) in the second sub-period.
IV.5.7 Inter-State Comparison
Inter-state comparison of area under gram suggests that Bihar was way behind other states, holding the seventh position in the country. While it occupied 2333.43 thousand ha in Madhya Pradesh and 1376.80 thousand ha in Rajasthan, it was a mere 146.90 thousand ha in Bihar during 1990-93. It formed only 2.25% of the gram area of the country. Comparing the trend rates of growth with major gram growing states, it is observed that the rate of decline in area was relatively low in Bihar. For example, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, and Karnataka, the major gram growing states, showed expansion in gram area at 1.18%, 2.50%, and 4.01% per annum during 1983-93. Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, and Haryana, on the other hand, showed shrinkage in gram area at (-2.89%), (-1.73%), and (-5.22%) per annum, respectively, as against (-2.37%) in Bihar during the same period.
IV.5.8 Regional Pattern
In terms of area, the south-west plains dominated with a share of 54.17% in the State gram area. Districts with relatively high area under gram included:
South-West Plains: Bhojpur (11.79%), Patna (10.23%), and Rohtas (13.35%)
Plateau: Palamu (7.39%) and Santhal Parganas (3.14%)
East: Munger (9.59%) and Bhagalpur (6.60%)
North-West Plains: Darbhanga (2.36%), Saran (1.60%), and Siwan (1.45%)
IV.5.9 Trend Growth Rates in Area
Further, shrinkage in area under gram was observed in all the four agro-climatic zones, however, varying from a high rate of decline at (-4.40%) in the north-west alluvial plains to a low of (-1.51%) in the south-west alluvial plains. The zone of plateau districts showed equally high levels of shrinkage at (-3.91%) during this period. East alluvial plains, on the other hand, showed a modest rate of shrinkage at (-2.43%). Between the two sub-periods, the second sub-period witnessed a slackened rate of decline in respect of north-west alluvial plains from (-6.43%) to (-4.21%) and east alluvial plains from (-2.72%) to (-1.12%). Shrinkage in area was, however, accelerated in the plateau districts from (-3.36%) to (-4.14%). The south-west alluvial plains experienced reversal from a declining trend in the first sub-period to an increasing trend in the second sub-period.
IV.5.10 Yield of Gram
There has been a definite increase in the yield of gram over these years in Bihar. It was 0.71 thousand tonnes/ha in 1970-71, which declined initially to reach the lowest level at 0.44 thousand tonnes/ha in 1973-74 but showed an increasing trend thereafter, reaching the maximum level of 1.02 tonnes/ha in 1991-92 with an index number reaching 143 points. The trend rate of growth during 1971-93 thus showed an increase at 2.14% per annum. Analysis of the trend rates of growth in two sub-periods suggests that although it showed an increasing trend in both periods, the rate of increase was higher during the second sub-period (1.35%) than the first sub-period (0.48%).
IV.5.11 Comparative Yield
Comparing the yield level across major gram growing states, it is encouraging to observe that Bihar figured at the top with a yield level of 0.91 tonnes/ha during 1990-93 as against 0.87 tonnes/ha in Uttar Pradesh, 0.61 tonnes/ha in Rajasthan, 0.50 tonnes/ha in Maharashtra, 0.76 tonnes/ha in Madhya Pradesh, and 0.68 tonnes/ha in Haryana. In terms of growth as well, it showed an encouraging picture for Bihar. It grew annually at 2.22% in Bihar, 1.57% in Madhya Pradesh, and 0.59% in Uttar Pradesh during 1983-93. In Rajasthan, it showed a declining trend at (-1.36%). However, Maharashtra and Haryana showed better performance with yield levels growing annually at around 3.30% during the same period.
IV.5.12 Yield by Zone and District
Across different zones, the south-west plains with high production of gram also showed a high yield level of gram at 0.98 t/ha. The zone of plateau districts had the least yield at 0.83 t/ha. Further, districts showing high levels of gram production also showed high levels of yield of gram. They included:
South-West: Patna (1.25 t/ha) and Bhojpur (1.04 t/ha)
North-West: Siwan (1.02 t/ha)
East: Begusarai (0.95 t/ha)
Plateau: Santhal Parganas (0.77 t/ha) and Palamu (0.74 t/ha)
IV.6 Rapeseed/Mustard
IV.6.1 Production
Rapeseed/mustard are the most important crops among oilseeds in terms of both area (105.43 thousand ha) and production (88.77 thousand tonnes) in Bihar. It formed 51.5% of the oilseeds area and 65.3% of oilseeds production in 1990-93 in the state. The analysis of the growth pattern in area, production, and yield of rapeseed/mustard crops during 1971-93 at State level and 1977-91 at zone/district level is presented below.
IV.6.2 Production of Rapeseed/Mustard
Production of rapeseed/mustard increased significantly during 1971-93 in the State. It was 49.0 thousand tonnes in 1970-71, which increased to a maximum of 109.0 thousand tonnes with the index number touching 222 in 1991-92. However, there was wide year-to-year fluctuation with minimum and maximum production at 34.9 and 109.0 thousand tonnes, respectively. While the first sub-period experienced stagnation with production hovering around 40.0 to 50.0 thousand tonnes, the second sub-period witnessed phenomenal increase in output. The trend rate of growth was negative at (-0.76%) per annum for the first sub-period and positive at 5.26% per annum for the second sub-period.
IV.6.3 Comparative Analysis
Bihar was not a major rapeseed/mustard growing state, ranking ninth among the states in its production. Rapeseed/mustard production was as high as 1924.93 thousand tonnes in Rajasthan, followed by 1034.77 thousand tonnes in Uttar Pradesh, whereas it was only 88.77 thousand tonnes in Bihar in 1990-93. Increase in rapeseed/mustard production in Bihar also does not compare well with the national average and other major states. For example, during 1983-93, while production of rapeseed/mustard grew annually at 7.34% in Bihar, it was 8.76% at the all-India level, 15.97% in Haryana, 14.44% in Gujarat, 12.97% in Madhya Pradesh, 17.50% in Rajasthan, and 13.43% in West Bengal.
IV.6.4 Regional Pattern
The zone of east plains was the major producer of rapeseed/mustard, contributing 43.30% to the State production. It was no less in the case of the north-west plains, contributing 37.62% of the State production. The share of other zones was relatively much less at 18.02% for the south-west and 9.64% for the plateau districts. Among the districts, Begusarai (16.81%) and Purnea (14.00%) figured prominently in its production. Other districts with relatively high share in rapeseed/mustard production included Santhal Parganas (4.26%) and Palamu (3.14%) in the plateau; Bhojpur (3.50%), Patna (4.46%), and Rohtas (4.64%) in the south-west plains; Saharsa (5.99%) and Katihar (2.59%) in the east plains; and Samastipur (8.49%), Siwan (5.89%), and West Champaran (4.71%) in the north-west plains.
IV.6.5 Trend Growth Rates
Analyzing the trend growth rates across different agro-climatic zones, it is observed that while in the first sub-period all agro-climatic zones as well as the State experienced a declining trend in production, the trend reversed in the second sub-period at the State level and for two major zones. The decline was as high as (-11.07%) in the plateau districts and as low as (-0.21%) in the south-west alluvial plains. The second sub-period brought a reversal in the positive direction in all zones, except the north-west alluvial plains which continued to experience a declining trend at an accelerated rate even during this period. The rate of decline in this zone was (-0.21%) in the first sub-period, but increased to (-2.10%) in the second sub-period. In other zones, the rate of increase in production of rapeseed/mustard was impressive. For example, in the north-west alluvial plains, it reversed from a declining trend at (-6.07%) in the first sub-period to an increasing trend at 8.03% in the second sub-period. In the plateau region, it reversed from a high rate of decline at (-11.09%) in the first sub-period to a low rate of decline at (-0.13%) in the second sub-period, and in the east alluvial plains, from a declining trend at (-0.47%) in the first sub-period to an increasing trend at 4.05% in the second sub-period.
IV.6.6 Rate of Growth in Rapeseed/Mustard Production
A large number of districts showed relatively high rates of growth in rapeseed/mustard production during 1977-91. They included Darbhanga (7.36%), Samastipur (8.31%), Siwan (10.20%), Vaishali (5.96%), Begusarai (15.85%), Bhagalpur (4.92%), Aurangabad (6.34%), Patna (7.66%), and Rohtas (11.88%).
IV.6.7 Instability in Rapeseed/Mustard Production
Rapeseed/mustard production during 1977-91 in the State showed stable increase, as the coefficient of variation was low at 15.14% only. Across different zones, the increasing trend rate of growth was more stable in the north-west plains with a coefficient of variation at 19.79% only. On the other hand, the increasing trend in respect of the east plains, the major rapeseed/mustard growing zone, was relatively more unstable, as the coefficient of variation was high at 25.71%. In the case of the south-west plains (31.72%) and plateau districts (22.48%), the increasing trend rate of growth was unstable. Districts with higher growth rates in rapeseed/mustard production showed higher levels of instability. For example, Begusarai, Purnea, and Saharsa with high trend rates of growth showed high coefficients of variation, ranging between 57.34% and 95.12%. Similar was the pattern in respect of other districts showing high rates of growth in rapeseed/mustard production.
IV.6 Rapeseed/Mustard
IV.6.8 Acceleration/Deceleration in Growth
State Level: The rate of growth in rapeseed/mustard production showed a slight acceleration at 0.40% per annum.
Zones:
South-West Plains: Exhibited a deceleration in growth at -0.15%.
Other Zones: The increasing trend showed acceleration, with rates of acceleration ranging between 0.80% and 0.32%.
Districts:
Saharsa and Bhojpur: Showed deceleration in growth rates, at -0.54% and -1.64%, respectively.
Other Districts: The growth rates were accelerating, ranging between 0.12% and 1.65%.
IV.6.9 Area Under Rapeseed/Mustard
Trend: The area under rapeseed/mustard remained stagnant until 1988-89 but began increasing thereafter. From 84.7 thousand ha. in 1970-71, it grew to 105.20 thousand ha. by 1992-93.
Growth Rates:
Overall: Increased annually by 0.42% from 1971-93.
First Sub-Period: The area expanded at 0.14% annually.
Second Sub-Period: The growth rate accelerated to 2.25% annually.
Inter-State Comparison: Bihar ranked ninth in area under rapeseed/mustard, with 109.10 thousand ha. in 1990-93, lagging behind Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. Growth rates during 1983-93 were lower in Bihar (2.50%) compared to states like Gujarat (10.04%), Haryana (9.61%), Rajasthan (15.38%), and West Bengal (10.23%).
IV.6.11 Regional Pattern
Major Zones:
North-West and East Plains: Accounted for nearly four-fifths of the area under rapeseed/mustard.
South-West and Plateau Districts: Had lesser coverage, with respective shares of 18.31% and 15.17%.
High Area Districts:
East Plains: Begusarai (11.06%), Purnea (16.35%), Saharsa (6.44%), Katihar (4.86%).
Plateau Zone: Santhal Parganas (6.10%), Palamu (5.24%).
South-West Plains: Rohtas (4.76%), Bhojpur (4.75%).
North-West Plains: Samastipur (6.16%), Siwan (5.15%), West Champaran (5.00%).
IV.6.12 Trend Growth Rates in Area
First Sub-Period: All zones, including the State, experienced a decline.
Second Sub-Period:
North-West and East Alluvial Plains: Reversed to increasing trends, with rates of 2.73% and 1.40%, respectively.
South-West Alluvial Plains: Experienced marginal acceleration from 0.26% to 0.95%.
Plateau Region: Continued to decline, though at a reduced rate from -9.05% to -3.30%.
IV.6.13 Yield of Rapeseed/Mustard
Overall Trend: Yield increased significantly, from 580 kg/ha in 1970-71 to 1070 kg/ha in 1991-92.
Growth Rates:
1971-93: Growth rate was 2.58% annually.
First Sub-Period: Yield growth rate was negative at -0.83%.
Second Sub-Period: Reversed to a positive growth rate of 3.07%.
Comparison:
Bihar: Yield was 0.84 t/ha.
Uttar Pradesh: 0.87 t/ha.
Rajasthan: 0.85 t/ha.
Gujarat: 1.09 t/ha.
Haryana: 1.10 t/ha.
Growth Rate: Uttar Pradesh (5.70%) exceeded Bihar (4.71%).
IV.6.14 Regional Yield Patterns
North-West Plains: Yield at 0.85 t/ha.
East Plains: Yield at 0.82 t/ha.
Plateau Zone: Lowest yield at 0.52 t/ha.
High Yield Districts:
Patna: 1.39 t/ha.
Begusarai: 1.25 t/ha.
Darbhanga: 1.04 t/ha.
Madhubani: 1.01 t/ha.
Samastipur: 1.13 t/ha.
Vaishali: 1.10 t/ha.
IV.6.15 Growth Rates in Yield
North-West Alluvial Plains: High growth rate of 5.03% per annum.
Plateau Districts: Growth rate of 3.17% per annum.
East Alluvial Plains: Relatively low growth rate at 2.65% per annum.
South-West Alluvial Plains: Declining trend at -3.05% per annum.
Sub-Period Comparison:
North-West Alluvial Plains: Reversed from -3.62% to 5.03%.
South-West Alluvial Plains: Further decline from -0.47% to -3.05%.
Plateau Region: Increased from 2.02% to 3.17%.
IV.7 Sugarcane
IV.7.2 Production
Trend: Sugarcane production in Bihar showed a declining trend until the late 1980s but reversed to increase thereafter. From 6209.4 thousand tonnes in 1970-71, it increased to 7805.30 thousand tonnes in 1990-91.
Growth Rates:
1971-93: Annual growth rate was 0.27%.
First Sub-Period: Decline at -3.79%.
Second Sub-Period: Reversed to an increase at 7.65%.
IV.7.3 Comparative Production
Major States:
Uttar Pradesh: 105867.27 thousand tonnes.
Maharashtra: 35152.10 thousand tonnes.
Bihar: 6971.17 thousand tonnes.
Growth Rate:
Bihar: 3.32% annually (1983-93).
Maharashtra: 2.33%.
Uttar Pradesh: 3.64%.
IV.7.4 Regional Pattern
Major Zone: North-West Plains, contributing 89.39% of the State's production.
Top Districts:
West Champaran: 45.61%.
Gopalganj: 21.07%.
East Champaran: 11.81%.
IV.7.5 Zone-wise Growth Rates
1977-91:
North-West Alluvial Plains: Growth rate of 2.16% annually.
East Alluvial Plains: Reversed from -3.58% to 2.85%.
South-West Alluvial Plains: Decline at -0.38%.
Plateau Districts: Continued decline at -6.94%.
IV.7.6 District-wise Growth Rates
Dominant Districts:
East Champaran: 1.52%.
West Champaran: 2.80%.
Gopalganj: 4.56%.
Other Notable Districts:
Samastipur: 4.74%.
Begusarai: 2.84%.
Bhagalpur: 2.84%.
Bhojpur: 3.53%.

IV.7 Sugarcane Production Trends in Bihar
IV.7.7 Production Stability
Although the production was increasing in the major sugarcane growing zone of the north-west plains, it did not show stability, as the coefficient of variation therein was relatively high at 22.98%. Other zones also showed wide fluctuations, as the coefficient of variation exceeded 20.0%. District-wise analysis suggested higher instability in sugarcane production in districts with relatively high increasing or high decreasing rates of growth. With specific reference to major sugarcane growing districts, it was observed that Gopalganj and West Champaran, both showing high increasing growth rates (4.46% and 2.80% respectively), had relatively high instability, with coefficients of variation at 43.77% and 31.38%, respectively. East Champaran, the other district where sugarcane production was large, showed relatively more stability with a coefficient of variation at 19.39% only.
IV.7.8 Acceleration/Deceleration in Production
Analysis of acceleration/deceleration in the growth of sugarcane production in different zones/districts indicated that there was acceleration in the increasing growth rate in sugarcane production (0.84%) in the north-west plains. The declining trend in the production of sugarcane in other zones, namely the east, south-west, and plateau districts, showed an accentuation with rates of acceleration at 0.50%, 0.44%, and 0.05% in respective zones. Analyzing the pattern across districts of the north-west where production of sugarcane was relatively more, it is significant to observe that in all the three major sugarcane growing districts of the zone, viz. West Champaran, East Champaran, and Gopalganj, there was acceleration in the increasing trend rate of growth. There was acceleration in the increasing growth rate in respect of Sitamarhi and Siwan as well. Samastipur was the only district of the zone which showed deceleration in its increasing growth rate. The declining growth rates in respect of Vaishali (-6.52%), Saran (-0.80%), Madhubani (-0.71%), and Darbhanga (-2.57%) showed to accelerate.
IV.7.9 Area Under Sugarcane
Area under sugarcane was as high as 161.90 thousand ha. in 1970-71 which fell to 111.80 thousand ha. in 1984-85. During 1971-87 it continued to decline with mild year-to-year fluctuation and from 1987-88 showed upward movement reaching the level at 148.0 thousand ha. in 1990-91. During 1971-93 it showed declining trend growth rate at (-)0.77% per annum. The declining trend rate of growth was more steep during the first sub-period at (-)2.29% per annum. The second sub-period, however, showed increasing trend growth rate at 1.60% per annum. Inter-state comparison of area under sugarcane showed that Bihar ranked sixth among the major sugarcane growing states. With an area of only 142.17 thousand ha. as compared to 1881.80 thousand ha. in 1990-93 in Uttar Pradesh, one does not get solace with the sixth position of the state in area under sugarcane. The rate of increase in sugarcane area in Bihar, although positive at 1.57% during 1983-93, was also less compared to Maharashtra (3.99%), Karnataka (4.56%), and Gujarat (3.70%) during the same period.
IV.7.10 Regional Pattern
The north-west plains had the largest share of area under sugarcane (85.90%) in the State total. Other zones had a negligible share in sugarcane area. Districts with high sugarcane production also had high sugarcane area. They included West Champaran (38.77%), followed by Gopalganj (16.04%) and East Champaran (10.05%).
IV.7.11 Growth in Area
In terms of growth in area, the north-west alluvial plains showed a reversal from a declining trend (-2.68%) in the first sub-period to an increasing trend (1.78%) in the second sub-period. The plateau districts and the south-west alluvial plains, on the other hand, showed a continued declining trend even in the second sub-period. In the east alluvial plains, the process of change was in the opposite direction, i.e., from an increasing trend (0.97%) in the first sub-period to a declining trend (-7.21%) in the second sub-period. Among the major sugarcane growing districts, while West Champaran and Gopalganj showed relatively high area expansion (4.00% and 4.60% respectively), East Champaran showed a declining trend at (-)1.77% during the second sub-period. In districts such as Madhubani, Muzaffarpur, Saran, Munger, and Bhojpur, the area under sugarcane expanded during this period.
IV.7.12 Yield Level of Sugarcane
The yield of sugarcane increased over the years in the state. It was 38.35 t/ha. in 1970-71 but declined thereafter to a level of 27.23 t/ha. in 1978-79. It maintained static condition till 1986-87 but showed a sharp increase in 1987-88 with yield level at 38.01 t/ha and further reaching a maximum of 53.72 t/ha. in 1989-90, but declined again to 45.39 t/ha. in 1992-93. The trend rate of growth was increasing annually at 1.04% only during 1971-93. Between the two sub-periods, it showed a declining trend at (-)1.48% in the first sub-period and an increasing trend at 6.02% in the second sub-period.
IV.7.13 Yield Comparison
The yield of sugarcane in Bihar was dismally low (45.10 t/ha. in 1990-93) compared to the national average (65.09 t/ha.) as well as states like Maharashtra (80.92 t/ha.), Tamil Nadu (103.13 t/ha.), Gujarat (86.75 t/ha.), Karnataka (82.51 t/ha.), and Uttar Pradesh (56.24 t/ha.).
IV.7.14 Regional Pattern
Across different zones, the yield was relatively high in the north-west plains (52.54 t/ha.) and low in the plateau districts (26.51 t/ha.). In the east and the south-west zones, it was almost similar at 41.66 t/ha. and 40.30 t/ha. respectively. Districts with high production of sugarcane were found to have high yield of sugarcane. They included East Champaran (53.04 t/ha.), Gopalganj (59.26 t/ha.), and West Champaran (53.10 t/ha.). In Siwan and Vaishali, although production of sugarcane was much less, its yield was fairly high at 53.92 t/ha. and 52.83 t/ha. respectively. Among the districts of other zones, the yield of sugarcane was found to be fairly high in Saharsa (52.95 t/ha.), Nawadah (46.76 t/ha.), Gaya (45.03 t/ha.), Singhbhum (51.14 t/ha.), and Santhal Parganas (46.14 t/ha.).
IV.7.15 Trend Rates of Growth in Yield
Analyzing the trend rates of growth in the yield of sugarcane for various agro-climatic zones and districts during 1977-91, it is observed that zones of north-west alluvial plains, east alluvial plains, and south-west alluvial plains showed increasing trends in yield at 2.01%, 1.08%, and 2.98% respectively. The plateau region, however, showed a declining trend at (-)2.02%. Analysis of trend rates of growth in two sub-periods suggests that the north-west alluvial plains gained significantly in yield by reversing the declining trend (-0.93%) in the first sub-period to an increasing trend (6.10%) in the second sub-period. Similar trends were observed in the east alluvial plains and the south-west alluvial plains with reversals to increasing trends at 10.07% and 4.90% respectively in the second sub-period. The plateau region continued to show a declining trend (-2.28%) even in the second sub-period. The major sugarcane growing districts such as West Champaran, East Champaran, and Gopalganj showed high growth rates in the yield of sugarcane during the second sub-period. In some of the less dominant sugarcane growing districts, however, the rate of growth in the yield of sugarcane was still more impressive. Such districts included Bhagalpur (17.98%), Munger (14.60%), and Saharsa (10.50%).
Conclusions
IV.7.16 Summary
The following are the broad conclusions with regard to the trend and pattern of growth of sugarcane in Bihar:
Bihar was one of the major sugarcane growing states in the country. However, this status slipped from the State in the early eighties. It was nowhere near Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra, and Tamil Nadu in terms of area as well as yield of sugarcane. The second sub-period witnessed a revival in sugarcane production in an upward direction. This emanated from both area expansion and yield increase. The rate of increase in yield was more impressive.
Sugarcane production was also region-specific in Bihar, with the north-west plains contributing almost four-fifths of the State's production. Among the districts of the zone, West Champaran, East Champaran, and Gopalganj, all forming a geographical cluster, excelled in sugarcane production.
All these districts showed a significant increase in sugarcane production, especially during the second sub-period, due largely to yield increase.
The resurrection in sugarcane production is also seen in other districts of the zone such as Madhubani, Muzaffarpur, Siwan, and Samastipur, which were traditionally sugarcane-growing districts.
Regional Pattern
IV.8.3 Jute Cultivation
Jute was a region-specific crop in Bihar, primarily cultivated in districts within the east alluvial plains. In other agro-climatic zones, jute cultivation was virtually absent. Of the total jute production in the state, 98.83% was produced in the east plains alone. Among the districts of the east plains, Purnea, Saharsa, and Katihar had shares of 57.59%, 21.31%, and 19.87% respectively. Production of jute increased annually at 2.15% in this zone during 1977-91. Among the major jute-growing districts of the zone, it grew in the range of 2.89% to 2.02%. Bhagalpur and Begusarai, on the other hand, showed a declining trend at (-)4.53% and (-)4.86% respectively. Jute production increased impressively among the districts of this zone, except Purnea, during the second sub-period. While Begusarai and Bhagalpur picked up in jute production during this period with trend growth rates of 16.80% and 3.53% respectively, it showed a declining trend in Purnea at (-)5.98% as compared to the increasing trend of 3.70% in the first sub-period. Saharsa and Katihar maintained steady trends in growth rates at 4.47% and 1.10% respectively during the second sub-period.
IV.8.4 Instability in Jute Production
The growth in jute production in Bihar was not stable, with a coefficient of variation in its growth during 1977-91 as high as 30.03%. Similar instability was observed in the east plains, with a coefficient of variation in the growth of jute production at 30.46%. Across major jute-growing districts, the coefficient of variation in the growth of jute production was also high, reaching 43.05% in Saharsa.
IV.8.5 Analysis of Acceleration/Deceleration
There was deceleration in the increasing trend rate of growth of jute production at (-)0.73% for the state. Similar patterns were observed in the increasing trend growth rates of the east and north-west plains, with rates of deceleration at (-)4.20% and (-)0.15% respectively. Across major jute districts, the growth rate in production accelerated only in Bhagalpur (0.49%), West Champaran (1.57%), and Madhubani (2.36%). In all other districts, there was deceleration in the increasing trend growth rates.
IV.8.6 Area Under Jute
Area under jute in Bihar has remained almost stagnant during 1971-93. It was 141.80 thousand ha. in 1970-71, which increased marginally to 144.70 thousand ha. in 1992-93, recording around 2.0% expansion in 23 years. The minimum area cultivated under jute was 99.30 thousand ha. in 1975-76, and the maximum was 212.90 thousand ha. in 1985-86, with an index number touching 150 points. Year-to-year fluctuation in area, however, was not wide over these years. The trend rate of growth in jute area for 1971-93 was 0.52% per annum. Analyzing the trend growth rate separately for two sub-periods, it was observed to be increasing at 1.32% per annum in the first sub-period but declining at (-)0.32% per annum in the second sub-period.
IV.8.7 Comparison with West Bengal
Compared to jute area in West Bengal, it was much less in Bihar. For example, while in West Bengal jute was cultivated in 522.30 thousand ha., it was only 142.03 thousand ha. in Bihar in 1990-93. Area expansion under jute during 1983-93 was insignificant in both states, at a rate of 0.08% in West Bengal and 0.25% in Bihar.
IV.8.8 Regional Pattern of Area Expansion
Area expansion was not impressive in the major jute-growing zone of the east plains, growing annually at 0.79% during 1977-91. Across different districts, it was found to be declining in Begusarai and Bhagalpur at (-)4.35% and (-)8.92% respectively. Districts of Katihar, Purnea, and Saharsa, on the other hand, showed increasing trend rates of growth, although at varying levels. The rate of increase was low in Katihar and Purnea at 0.23% and 0.66% respectively. Saharsa showed a relatively more impressive increase at 2.08% per annum. The declining trend intensified in the second sub-period at (-)11.20% in Begusarai. In Purnea, it reversed from an increasing trend of 3.90% in the first sub-period to a declining trend of (-)0.86% in the second sub-period. Bhagalpur, however, showed an increasing trend in both sub-periods. Saharsa maintained a steady trend at 2.21% even in the second sub-period. In the case of Katihar, the rate of increase in jute area slackened from 3.70% in the first sub-period to 1.29% in the second sub-period.
IV.8.9 Yield of Jute
Much of the increase in jute production emanated from yield increase only, as the area showed negligible expansion over this period. The yield of jute in the state was 0.545 t/ha. in 1970-71, which increased to 0.765 t/ha. in 1992-93. The minimum yield level was 0.451 t/ha. in 1980-81 and the maximum was 0.822 t/ha. in 1991-92. The trend rate of growth in yield level was 2.54% during 1971-93. Analyzing the trend rate of growth separately for two sub-periods, it was observed to be increasing in both sub-periods, growing at 1.24% per annum in the first sub-period and 1.65% per annum in the second sub-period. Compared to West Bengal, the yield level was relatively much less for Bihar. While it was 1.98 t/ha. for West Bengal, it was 0.77 t/ha. in Bihar in 1990-93. The yield level was higher in West Bengal by almost 157%. The rate of increase in yield was also significantly higher at 3.42% in West Bengal compared to 2.95% in Bihar during 1983-93.
IV.8.10 Regional Pattern of Yield
The yield level of jute was much higher in non-traditional jute-growing areas. It was as high as 0.888 t/ha. in the north-west plains, followed by 0.783 t/ha. in the plateau districts, as compared to 0.593 t/ha. in the traditional jute-growing districts of the east plains. Analysis at the district level also suggests a similar pattern. The non-traditional jute-growing districts showed higher yield levels than traditional jute-growing districts. It was as high as 0.944 t/ha. in West Champaran, 0.922 t/ha. in Vaishali, and 0.902 t/ha. in Darbhanga of the north-west plains, as compared to 0.525 t/ha. in Purnea, 0.764 t/ha. in Saharsa, and 0.685 t/ha. in Katihar of the east plains. Even the districts of the plateau zone displayed higher yield levels of jute in the range of 0.748-0.800 t/ha.
IV.8.11 Trend Rates of Growth in Yield
The trend rate of growth in the yield of jute in the east alluvial plains was low at 1.36% per annum compared to 5.57% in the north-west plains during 1977-91. Across different districts, while it showed a declining trend at (-)0.19% in Begusarai, it showed an increasing trend in all other districts of the east plains. It was as high as 4.06% in Bhagalpur, followed by 1.88% in Katihar and 1.36% in Purnea. Saharsa had a relatively low trend rate of growth at 0.81% only. However, the pattern shifted in these districts in the second sub-period, with Begusarai showing a phenomenal increase in yield at 28.0% per annum. Purnea, on the other hand, reversed to a declining trend at (-)5.12% per annum during this period. In Saharsa, the yield level accelerated during the second sub-period to 2.25% per annum. Katihar, however, experienced slackening growth in yield from 4.46% in the first sub-period to 0.19% per annum during the second sub-period.
Conclusions
IV.8.12 Summary
The following broad conclusions are thus arrived at:
Bihar has been a traditional grower of jute. However, it lagged far behind West Bengal in terms of area coverage as well as yield of jute. The production of jute recorded a significant increase in the state. The rate of increase in jute production was higher in the first sub-period, but slackened to a lower rate in the second sub-period.
The increase in jute production was more due to yield increase, as the area under jute remained static.
The production of jute in the state was region-specific, with the east plains showing a dominant share. Among the districts of this zone, jute was produced largely in Purnea, Katihar, and Saharsa. In all these districts, there was a significant increase in jute production due to both area expansion and yield increase.

Table IV.8.1
Area, Production, and Yield of Jute Crop in Bihar During 1971-93
Table IV.8.2
Compound Annual Rate of Growth (%)
Figures in parentheses indicate the level of significance.
 
IV.9 Potato
Bihar was the third largest state in the country in potato production, following Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. Potato formed 21.17% of the non-food crop area in the state. The growth in potato production and its regional pattern in Bihar are discussed below.
IV.9.1 Production
The production of potato in Bihar initially showed a declining trend but recovered to reach 1,383.0 thousand tonnes in 1975-76. It remained stagnant at around 1,250-1,350 thousand tonnes until 1985-86. Production surged to over 1,523.0 thousand tonnes in 1986-87 and stabilized at around 1,557.6 thousand tonnes. The annual growth rate of potato production during 1971-93 was 2.28%. In the two sub-periods, the growth rate was 2.03% in the first sub-period and 2.28% in the second sub-period. Compared to the national level or major potato-growing states, Bihar’s growth rate was less impressive. For instance, the national rate was 2.65% during 1983-93, while West Bengal had a growth rate of 8.51%, and Uttar Pradesh had a rate of 3.75%.
IV.9.2 Regional Pattern
The north-west plains emerged as the major potato-growing zone, contributing 37.64% of the state’s production. Other zones had production shares ranging between 22.90% and 17.68%. Key potato-producing districts included:
North-West Plains: Samastipur (5.98%), East Champaran (4.73%), Madhubani (4.26%), and Saran (4.16%)
East Plains: Begusarai (4.30%) and Saharsa (4.18%)
South-West Plains: Gaya (4.83%), Nalanda (5.70%), and Rohtas (4.42%)
Plateau Zone: Hazaribagh (5.44%) and Ranchi (4.21%)
IV.9.3 Growth Trends by Zone
South-West Alluvial Plains: Declining trend at (-0.35%)
North-West Alluvial Plains: Increasing trend at 1.36%
East Alluvial Plains: Increasing trend at 4.64%
Plateau Districts: Increasing trend at 3.96%
In the north-west alluvial plains, the growth rate improved from (-0.79%) in the first sub-period to 3.02% in the second sub-period. Conversely, the east alluvial plains experienced a slowdown from 5.29% to 4.50%. The south-west alluvial plains saw a reduction in the rate of decline from (-6.91%) to (-0.79%), and plateau districts showed a marginal improvement from 2.56% to 3.10%.
IV.9.4 Regional Growth Rates
Growth rates were higher in districts with significant potato production:
East Champaran: 5.29%
Madhubani: 9.60%
Samastipur: 5.15%
Begusarai: 11.40%
Purnea: 9.67%
Saharsa: 4.88%
Rohtas: 5.71%
Hazaribagh: 5.48%
Ranchi: 3.19%
IV.9.5 Instability in Potato Production
The state-level growth rate was fairly stable with a coefficient of variation of 7.41%. The north-west plains had a coefficient of variation of 7.67%. The plateau and east zones were less stable with coefficients of variation of 15.81% and 13.72%, respectively. The south-west plains had a high coefficient of variation at 16.10%. At the district level, except for Purnea and Samastipur, districts with an increasing trend had high instability, with coefficients of variation exceeding 25%. Purnea and Samastipur had relatively more stable growth with coefficients of variation of 16.32% and 14.58%, respectively. Declining trend districts showed more stability with coefficients of variation less than 20%, including Saran, Sitamarhi, Vaishali, and Katihar.
IV.9.6 Acceleration/Deceleration
There was a slight acceleration in the growth rate of potato production at the state level (0.25%). Acceleration was observed in the north-west and east zones, while the south-west plains showed an accelerating decline. Major potato-growing districts with accelerated growth rates included:
Samastipur: 0.55%
Begusarai: 0.69%
Saharsa: 0.25%
Gaya: 1.08%
Nalanda: 0.77%
Rohtas: 0.13%
Ranchi: 1.11%
In contrast, districts like Hazaribagh and East Champaran showed deceleration at (-0.31%) and (-0.70%), respectively. Saran and Nalanda also showed acceleration in their declining trends.
IV.9.7 Area Under Potato
The area under potato in Bihar was 1.00 lakh hectares in 1970-71, increasing to 1.47 lakh hectares in 1976-77. It remained stagnant around 1.35 lakh hectares until 1986-87. By 1992-93, the area had expanded to 1.71 lakh hectares. The trend rate of growth was 1.85% during 1971-93, with 3.03% in the first sub-period and 2.49% in the second. Compared to other major potato-growing states, Bihar's growth rate was lower. Uttar Pradesh had a rate of 2.79%, West Bengal 6.23%, and Bihar 2.39% during 1983-93. The national average was 5.60%.
IV.9.8 Regional Pattern of Area Expansion
The north-west plains had a higher share of area under potato. Notable districts with high shares included:
North-West Plains: East Champaran (4.64%), Samastipur (4.62%), Saran (4.20%)
East Plains: Purnea (6.49%), Saharsa (4.42%)
South-West Plains: Gaya (4.68%)
Plateau Zone: Hazaribagh (6.93%), Ranchi (5.45%)
Trend rates of growth in area showed significant variation:
North-West Alluvial Plains: Increasing trend at 0.60%
East Alluvial Plains: Increasing trend at 2.20%
Plateau Region: Declining trend at (-7.93%)
South-West Alluvial Plains: Declining trend at (-1.93%)
The south-west alluvial plains experienced a reversal from a decline of (-5.30%) in the first sub-period to an increase of 0.22% in the second sub-period. The plateau region saw a slowdown in growth from 2.41% to 1.77%. The north-west and east alluvial plains recorded acceleration in area growth during the second sub-period. Less dominant potato-growing districts such as Darbhanga (5.68%), West Champaran (6.43%), Katihar (6.10%), and Palamu (4.52%) showed higher growth rates. Major districts like Madhubani (3.27%), Begusarai (10.47%), Purnea (3.06%), and Saharsa (3.00%) also expanded in area, while Saran, Nalanda, and Nawadah experienced a shrinking trend.
IV.9.9 Yield of Potato
The yield of potato in Bihar declined from 11.11 tonnes/ha. in 1970-71 to around 8-10 tonnes/ha. until 1992-93. The trend rate of growth in yield during 1971-93 was 0.43% per annum, with negative rates of (-1.01%) in the first sub-period and (-0.20%) in the second. Bihar’s yield of 9.15 tonnes/ha. in 1990-93 was considerably lower compared to Gujarat (24.98 tonnes/ha.), West Bengal (22.09 tonnes/ha.), Uttar Pradesh (17.17 tonnes/ha.), and the national average of 13.51 tonnes/ha.

IV.9.10 Analysis of Growth Trends in Potato Cultivation
Analysis further revealed that the trend rates of growth in area varied widely across different agro-climatic zones. It showed an increasing trend during 1977-91 in the:
North-West Alluvial Plains: 0.60%
East Alluvial Plains: 2.20%
Conversely, the:
Plateau Region: -7.93%
South-West Alluvial Plains: -1.93%
recorded a declining trend. Analyzing the trend rates of growth across two sub-periods:
South-West Alluvial Plains: Witnessed a reversal from a declining trend in the first sub-period (-5.30%) to an increasing trend in the second sub-period (0.22%).
Plateau Region: Experienced a slowdown in the increasing trend rate of growth from 2.41% to 1.77%.
North-West Alluvial Plains and East Alluvial Plains: Recorded acceleration in area increase during the second sub-period.
Across different districts, the area under potato showed relatively higher growth rates in less dominant potato-growing districts. Such districts included:
Darbhanga: 5.68%
West Champaran: 6.43%
Katihar: 6.10%
Palamu: 4.52%
Among the major potato-growing districts:
Madhubani: 3.27%
Begusarai: 10.47%
Purnea: 3.06%
Saharsa: 3.00%
showed expansion of area, whereas:
Saran
Nalanda
Nawadah
showed a shrinking trend.
III) Yield of Potato
The yield of potato was declining in Bihar. It was:
11.11 tonnes/ha in 1970-71
Declined thereafter with yield levels hovering around 8-10 tonnes/ha until 1992-93.
The trend rate of growth in yield during 1971-93 was 0.43% per annum. However, it was observed to be negative when separately analyzed for the two sub-periods:
First Sub-Period: Rate of decline was (-)1.01%
Second Sub-Period: Rate of decline was (-)0.20%
When compared with the national average and those in the major potato-growing states, it was disappointingly low at:
9.15 tonnes/ha in Bihar
24.98 tonnes/ha in Gujarat
22.09 tonnes/ha in West Bengal
17.17 tonnes/ha in Uttar Pradesh
The national average was 13.51 tonnes/ha in 1990-93.
Regional Pattern
Although both production and area under potato were high in the north-west plains, in terms of yield, the:
South-West Plains: 11.53 t/ha
North-West: 9.91 t/ha
East Plains: 9.15 t/ha
Plateau Zone: 7.87 t/ha
showed the following patterns:
Across different districts, it was significantly high at:
Nalanda: 18.03 t/ha
Begusarai: 13.33 t/ha
Rohtas: 13.39 t/ha
It was impressively high in such districts as:
Darbhanga: 12.70 t/ha
Gopalganj: 12.61 t/ha
Madhubani: 12.77 t/ha
Samastipur: 12.47 t/ha
In the north-west plains; and:
Patna: 12.39 t/ha
Aurangabad: 10.44 t/ha
Nawadah: 10.59 t/ha
In the south-west plains.
Yield of potato did not vary much among the districts of the plateau zone, with yields ranging between:
9.31 t/ha in Santhal Parganas
7.39 t/ha in Giridih
IV.9.13 Yield Trends by Region
The second sub-period brought:
North-West Alluvial Plains: Reversal from declining (-2.10%) to increasing trend (1.10%).
East Alluvial Plains: Slackening in the increasing trend rate of growth from 3.58% in the first sub-period to 0.92% in the second sub-period.
South-West Alluvial Plains: Continued to have a declining trend (-1.01%) even in the second sub-period.
Plateau Districts: Recorded increasing trend in both sub-periods.
Across different districts, the rate of growth in yield of potato was relatively high in districts dominant in its production. These included:
Samastipur: 6.63%
Begusarai: 7.65%
Nalanda: 4.82%
Some of the districts less dominant in potato production also showed relatively high rates of growth in yield. They included:
Darbhanga: 8.75%
Giridih: 3.90%
Palamu: 6.22%
IV.9.14 Conclusions
The foregoing discussion thus suggests the following broad conclusions on the trend and pattern of growth in potato cultivation in Bihar:
Potato production in the State was only next to West Bengal and Uttar Pradesh in the country. It showed an increasing trend in Bihar but at a lower rate than in West Bengal and Uttar Pradesh.
Much of the increase in potato production was due to area expansion, as yield showed a declining trend.
Production of potato was not region-specific in the State, as it was being cultivated in significant measure in most of the districts in different agro-climatic zones of the state.
Districts growing potato dominantly showed relatively more impressive performance in potato production, especially in the second sub-period.
While in most of the districts both area and yield of potato showed an increase, the districts of the south-west plains showed a reversal in potato output due largely to the decline in the yield rate.
Districts of the south-west plains were dominant in potato production but showed a reversal in yield.
Tables
Table IV.9.1: Area, Production, and Yield of Potato in Bihar during 1971-93
Table IV.9.2: Compound Annual Rate of Growth (%)
Figures in parentheses indicate the level of significance.

IV.10 CHILLIES
The crop group of spices and condiments grown in Bihar includes turmeric, coriander, chillies, ginger, and garlic. Chillies constituted a major share in terms of both area and production among these crops in Bihar. As much as 46.8% of the spices area and 47.8% of its production were under the chilli crop in the State in 1990-93. The following paragraphs examine the trend and pattern of growth in its production as well as area and yield over the years across different agro-climatic zones and districts in the State.
i) Production
There was a sharp decline in chilli production in the state over these years. It was as high as 16.50 thousand tonnes in 1970-71, reaching a peak of 24.40 thousand tonnes in 1972-73. However, it started a nosedive thereafter, with the lowest level of production at 4.0 thousand tonnes in 1987-88. It, however, took an upward movement to reach 13.00 thousand tonnes in 1992-93. The trend rate of growth recorded a decline at (-)5.12% per annum during 1971-93. The rate of decline was (-)11.99% per annum in the second sub-period compared to (-)0.18% per annum in the first sub-period. The performance of the state in chilli production was poor compared to major chilli-growing states. For example, while Andhra Pradesh had a production of chilli at 320.67 thousand tonnes, it was only 7.90 thousand tonnes in Bihar in 1990-93. States like Karnataka, Maharashtra, Orissa, and Tamil Nadu were similarly much ahead of Bihar in chilli production. In terms of growth rate, it lagged far behind. In Andhra Pradesh, Orissa, and West Bengal, chilli production increased annually at 6.65%, 3.87%, and 8.92% respectively, but in Bihar, it declined annually at (-)5.31% during 1983-93.
Regional Pattern
Across different zones, it was the east and the north-west plains that excelled in chilli production in the state. While the east plains had a share of 41.11% in the State chilli production, it was 34.46% for the north-west plains. Across different districts:
Begusarai in the east plains and Rohtas in the south-west plains dominated in chilli production with shares of 32.35% and 21.84% respectively.
Other districts that produced chilli significantly included:
East Champaran (2.64%)
Muzaffarpur (2.65%)
Samastipur (6.75%)
Vaishali (3.05%) in the north-west plains
Muhger (1.04%) and Purnea (6.05%) in the east plains
Gaya (2.52%) and Patna (8.70%) in the south-west plains
Palamu (2.87%) in the plateau zone
The declining trend in chilli production was recorded in all four agro-climatic zones. However, the zones in the north Gangetic plains, i.e., north-west alluvial plains and east alluvial plains, displayed a higher rate of decline at (-)10.35% and (-)11.33% respectively compared to those in the south of the Ganges. It was (-)5.29% for the south-west alluvial plains and (-)6.32% for the plateau regions. During the first sub-period, the rate of decline was almost uniform across different zones. It, however, became quite sharp in the second sub-period with respect to the north-west alluvial plains (-22.69%), east-alluvial plains (-25.43%), and plateau districts (-19.72%). The south-west alluvial plains maintained almost a similar rate of decline (-5.0%) even in the second sub-period. The east alluvial plains experienced a reversal from an increasing trend (0.81%) in the first sub-period to a high rate of decline (-25.43%) in the second sub-period.
IV.10.5 Instability in Chilli Production
Despite the general declining trend in chilli production, there were districts that showed an increase in production during 1977-91. Such districts were those with less share in state chilli production. They included:
East Champaran (5.13%)
Muzaffarpur (5.01%)
Saran (5.33%)
West Champaran (3.54%)
Among the dominant chilli-growing districts, only Vaishali (5.85%) showed an increasing trend. Samastipur and Begusarai, the other dominant chilli-growing districts, recorded a sharp declining trend during the same period.
IV.10.6 Instability in Chilli Production
The rate of decline in chilli production was highly unstable with a coefficient of variation high at 31.60%. Across different agro-climatic zones, the rate of decline was relatively more stable in the south-west plains with a coefficient of variation at 24.98% compared to 35.00% in the north-west plains, 41.50% in the east plains, and 34.32% in the plateau districts. Analyzing the pattern across major chilli-growing districts, production in:
Madhubani
Begusarai
Patna
was unstable, with the coefficient of variation exceeding 50.0% in all such cases. The increasing trend in Rohtas and Purnea also showed instability with high coefficients of variation. The declining trend rates of growth in most of the districts were found to accelerate.
Analysis of Acceleration/Deceleration
The declining trend in the growth rate of chilli production in the State showed deceleration (-1.62%). Across different zones:
North-West: (-1.21%)
East: (-1.78%)
Plateau Zone: (-1.16%)
showed deceleration, while the south-west plains showed acceleration (0.31%) in the declining trend rates of growth. Analysis at the district level suggests that in:
Purnea: Acceleration in increasing growth rates at 0.77%
West Champaran: Acceleration at 0.25%
Districts such as Muzaffarpur, Saran, Sitamarhi, Vaishali, and Rohtas showed deceleration in their increasing growth rates. The declining trend rates of growth in most of the districts were, on the other hand, found to accelerate.
ii) Area under Chilli
The shrinkage in area under chilli was significantly large in the State. Area under chilli in the state was as high as 20.90 thousand hectares in 1970-71, which fell to 10.00 thousand hectares in 1980-81. It further slipped down to just 4.00 thousand hectares in 1987-88 and continued to hover around the same till 1991-92. In 1992-93, however, it picked up to reach 12.00 thousand hectares but remained still far below the 1970-71 level. The trend rate of growth showed a decline at (-)5.51% per annum during 1971-93. The rate of decline became more sharp (-9.49%) in the second sub-period compared to the first sub-period (-3.21%). Compared to major chilli-growing states, the area under chilli was significantly low in Bihar. It was as high as:
224.50 thousand hectares in Andhra Pradesh
137.93 thousand hectares in Karnataka
128.80 thousand hectares in Maharashtra
93.13 thousand hectares in Orissa
whereas it was just 7.37 thousand hectares in Bihar in 1990-93. Again, while it showed expansion in Andhra Pradesh (3.01%) and Orissa (3.35%) during 1983-93, it showed a declining trend in Karnataka (-1.14%) and Maharashtra (-1.40%). The rate of decline was high in Bihar (-4.27%) during the same period.
 
IV.10 CHILLIES
The crop group of spices and condiments grown in Bihar includes turmeric, coriander, chillies, ginger, and garlic. Chillies constituted a major share in terms of both area and production among these crops in Bihar. As much as 46.8% of the spices area and 47.8% of its production were under the chilli crop in the State in 1990-93. The following paragraphs examine the trend and pattern of growth in its production as well as area and yield over the years across different agro-climatic zones and districts in the State.
i) Production
There was a sharp decline in chilli production in the state over these years. It was as high as 16.50 thousand tonnes in 1970-71, reaching a peak of 24.40 thousand tonnes in 1972-73. However, it started a nosedive thereafter, with the lowest level of production at 4.0 thousand tonnes in 1987-88. It, however, took an upward movement to reach 13.00 thousand tonnes in 1992-93. The trend rate of growth recorded a decline at (-)5.12% per annum during 1971-93. The rate of decline was (-)11.99% per annum in the second sub-period compared to (-)0.18% per annum in the first sub-period. The performance of the state in chilli production was poor compared to major chilli-growing states. For example, while Andhra Pradesh had a production of chilli at 320.67 thousand tonnes, it was only 7.90 thousand tonnes in Bihar in 1990-93. States like Karnataka, Maharashtra, Orissa, and Tamil Nadu were similarly much ahead of Bihar in chilli production. In terms of growth rate, it lagged far behind. In Andhra Pradesh, Orissa, and West Bengal, chilli production increased annually at 6.65%, 3.87%, and 8.92% respectively, but in Bihar, it declined annually at (-)5.31% during 1983-93.
Regional Pattern
IV.10.8 Across different zones, it was the east and the north-west plains that excelled in chilli production in the state. While the east plains had a share of 41.11% in the State chilli production, it was 34.46% for the north-west plains. Across different districts:
Begusarai in the east plains and Rohtas in the south-west plains dominated in chilli production with shares of 32.35% and 21.84% respectively.
Other districts that produced chilli significantly included:
East Champaran (2.64%)
Muzaffarpur (2.65%)
Samastipur (6.75%)
Vaishali (3.05%) in the north-west plains
Muhger (1.04%) and Purnea (6.05%) in the east plains
Gaya (2.52%) and Patna (8.70%) in the south-west plains
Palamu (2.87%) in the plateau zone
The declining trend in chilli production was recorded in all four agro-climatic zones. However, the zones in the north Gangetic plains, i.e., north-west alluvial plains and east alluvial plains, displayed a higher rate of decline at (-)10.35% and (-)11.33% respectively compared to those in the south of the Ganges. It was (-)5.29% for the south-west alluvial plains and (-)6.32% for the plateau regions. During the first sub-period, the rate of decline was almost uniform across different zones. It, however, became quite sharp in the second sub-period with respect to the north-west alluvial plains (-22.69%), east-alluvial plains (-25.43%), and plateau districts (-19.72%). The south-west alluvial plains maintained almost a similar rate of decline (-5.0%) even in the second sub-period. The east alluvial plains experienced a reversal from an increasing trend (0.81%) in the first sub-period to a high rate of decline (-25.43%) in the second sub-period.
IV.10.5 Instability in Chilli Production
Despite the general declining trend in chilli production, there were districts that showed an increase in production during 1977-91. Such districts were those with less share in state chilli production. They included:
East Champaran (5.13%)
Muzaffarpur (5.01%)
Saran (5.33%)
West Champaran (3.54%)
Among the dominant chilli-growing districts, only Vaishali (5.85%) showed an increasing trend. Samastipur and Begusarai, the other dominant chilli-growing districts, recorded a sharp declining trend during the same period.
IV.10.6 Instability in Chilli Production
The rate of decline in chilli production was highly unstable with a coefficient of variation high at 31.60%. Across different agro-climatic zones, the rate of decline was relatively more stable in the south-west plains with a coefficient of variation at 24.98% compared to 35.00% in the north-west plains, 41.50% in the east plains, and 34.32% in the plateau districts. Analyzing the pattern across major chilli-growing districts, production in:
Madhubani
Begusarai
Patna
was unstable, with the coefficient of variation exceeding 50.0% in all such cases. The increasing trend in Rohtas and Purnea also showed instability with high coefficients of variation. The declining trend rates of growth in most of the districts were found to accelerate.
Analysis of Acceleration/Deceleration
The declining trend in the growth rate of chilli production in the State showed deceleration (-1.62%). Across different zones:
North-West: (-1.21%)
East: (-1.78%)
Plateau Zone: (-1.16%)
showed deceleration, while the south-west plains showed acceleration (0.31%) in the declining trend rates of growth. Analysis at the district level suggests that in:
Purnea: Acceleration in increasing growth rates at 0.77%
West Champaran: Acceleration at 0.25%
Districts such as Muzaffarpur, Saran, Sitamarhi, Vaishali, and Rohtas showed deceleration in their increasing growth rates. The declining trend rates of growth in most of the districts were, on the other hand, found to accelerate.
ii) Area under Chilli
The shrinkage in area under chilli was significantly large in the State. Area under chilli in the state was as high as 20.90 thousand hectares in 1970-71, which fell to 10.00 thousand hectares in 1980-81. It further slipped down to just 4.00 thousand hectares in 1987-88 and continued to hover around the same till 1991-92. In 1992-93, however, it picked up to reach 12.00 thousand hectares but remained still far below the 1970-71 level. The trend rate of growth showed a decline at (-)5.51% per annum during 1971-93. The rate of decline became more sharp (-9.49%) in the second sub-period compared to the first sub-period (-3.21%). Compared to major chilli-growing states, the area under chilli was significantly low in Bihar. It was as high as:
224.50 thousand hectares in Andhra Pradesh
137.93 thousand hectares in Karnataka
128.80 thousand hectares in Maharashtra
93.13 thousand hectares in Orissa
whereas it was just 7.37 thousand hectares in Bihar in 1990-93. Again, while it showed expansion in Andhra Pradesh (3.01%) and Orissa (3.35%) during 1983-93, it showed a declining trend in Karnataka (-1.14%) and Maharashtra (-1.40%). The rate of decline was high in Bihar (-4.27%) during the same period.
IV.10.9 Regional Pattern
Zones/districts with high chilli production had also high area under it. For example, the east plains with maximum production of chilli (41.11%) had maximum area under chilli as well (48.39%). It was followed by the north-west plains (22.11%) and the south-west plains (20.10%). It was relatively much less in the plateau zone (9.40%). Across different districts, the area under chilli was maximum (40.49%) in Begusarai, followed by Samastipur (9.77%) and Rohtas (7.25%). Other districts with relatively high area under chilli included:
East Champaran (2.74%)
Muzaffarpur (2.51%)
Vaishali (3.45%) in the north-west plains
Purnea (4.16%) in the east plains
Gaya (4.23%) and Patna (5.24%) in the south-west plains
Palamu (5.53%) and Ranchi (1.86%) in the plateau zone
It is also observed that Rohtas with a share in chilli production at 21.84% had only 7.25% share in the State's chilli area. This was largely due to high yield level in this district.
IV.10.10 Shrinkage in Area under Chilli
Shrinkage in area under chilli was observed in all the agro-climatic zones during 1977-91. However, it was relatively high (-11.82%) in the north-west alluvial plains, followed by the east alluvial plains (-6.18%). The rate of decline was slightly less in respect of the south-west alluvial plains and plateau districts at (-2.84%) and (-4.37%) respectively during this period. Shrinkage in area was more prominent during the second sub-period in respect of the north-west alluvial plains (-18.91%) and east alluvial plains (-14.42%). In the case of the east alluvial plains, it was a case of reversal from increasing trend in the first sub-period (0.74%) to declining trend (-14.42%) in the second sub-period. The south-west alluvial plains and plateau districts showed declining trend in both the sub-periods. Across different districts, the area under chilli was recorded to expand in districts being less dominant in chilli cultivation. They included:
West Champaran (8.07%)
Saran (1.76%)
Nawadah (2.43%)
Rohtas (3.70%)
Hazaribagh (9.12%)
Ranchi (1.00%)
Districts dominant in chilli cultivation such as Begusarai, Samastipur, Rohtas, Patna, and Purnea showed declining trend in its area in the range of (-0.70%) and (-27.34%).
iii) Yield of Chilli
IV.10.11 Yield Trend
Unlike production and area, the yield of chilli showed an increasing trend in the state, albeit marginally. It was 0.79 tonnes/ha. in 1970-71, which showed upward movement reaching its peak at 1.24 tonnes/ha. in 1981-82. The yield, however, started declining from 1984-85, touching the minimum of 0.80 tonnes/ha. in 1988-89. The trend rate of growth in the yield of chilli was found to be increasing (0.54%) during 1971-93. However, it showed a declining trend at (-)2.50% per annum in the second sub-period as against an increasing trend of 3.29% per annum in the first sub-period. Comparing the yield level with other major chilli-growing states, it was found to be relatively high at 1.02 tonnes/ha. in 1990-93 for Bihar. It was only next to Andhra Pradesh (1.43 tonnes/ha.). In other states, it was much less at 0.29 tonnes/ha. in Karnataka, 0.50 tonnes/ha. in Maharashtra, and 0.81 tonnes/ha. in Orissa. In terms of growth rate, however, while it showed an increase in yield at 2.50% per annum at all-India level, 3.53% for Andhra Pradesh, and 0.50% for Orissa, it was declining at (-)1.52% in Bihar during 1983-93.
IV.10.12 Regional Pattern
Across different zones, the east plains excelled in chilli production as well as in area. However, in terms of yield, it was impressively high at 1.4 t/ha. in the south-west plains as against a low of 0.69 t/ha. in the east plains, 0.69 t/ha. in the north-west plains, and 0.50 t/ha. in the plateau zone. Across different districts, Rohtas emerged at the top with almost twice the yield level (0.25 t/ha.). Other districts to show relatively high yield included:
Bhojpur (0.15 t/ha.)
Patna (0.12 t/ha.) in the south-west plains
Katihar (0.14 t/ha.) and Purnea (0.12 t/ha.) in the east plains
In Begusarai, the largest chilli-growing district, the yield was much less at 0.65 t/ha. only. Among the districts of the north-west plains, the non-traditional chilli-growing districts showed higher yield than those in traditional chilli-growing districts. For example, it was high at 0.95 t/ha. in the non-traditional chilli-growing district of Gopalganj but low at 0.56 t/ha. in the traditional chilli-growing district of Samastipur.
IV.10.13 Trend Rates of Growth in Yield
Zonewise analysis of the trend rates of growth in the yield of chilli clearly demonstrated that only the north-west alluvial plains (1.47%) had an increasing trend in yield during 1977-91. All other agro-climatic zones showed a declining trend. The rate of decline was as high as (-)5.15% per annum in the case of the east alluvial plains and (-)2.45% in the south-west alluvial plains. In the plateau districts, it declined annually at (-)1.94%. Between the two sub-periods, it showed an increasing trend in the first sub-period at 2.90% in the north-west alluvial plains, 0.07% in the east alluvial plains, and 4.22% in the plateau districts. However, the trend reversed to a declining rate in the second sub-period in all these zones at (-)3.78%, (-)11.00%, and (-)14.82% respectively. The south-west alluvial plains showed a declining trend in both the sub-periods at (-)1.90% and (-)2.30% respectively.
IV.10.14 District Level Analysis
Across different districts, while the rate of growth in the yield of chilli was negative in most cases, there were districts that showed a high rate of growth during 1977-91. Such districts included:
East Champaran (6.20%)
Gopalganj (5.71%)
Saran (6.04%)
Siwan (6.21%)
Vaishali (10.21%)
West Champaran (6.10%)
Katihar (5.92%)
Purnea (5.19%)
Saharsa (4.63%)
However, none of these districts were dominant in chilli production.

IV.10 CHILLIES
The crop group of spices and condiments grown in Bihar includes turmeric, coriander, chillies, ginger, and garlic. Chillies constituted a major share in terms of both area and production among these crops in Bihar. As much as 46.8% of the spices area and 47.8% of its production were under the chilli crop in the State in 1990-93. The following paragraphs examine the trend and pattern of growth in its production as well as area and yield over the years across different agro-climatic zones and districts in the State.
i) Production
There was a sharp decline in chilli production in the state over these years. It was as high as 16.50 thousand tonnes in 1970-71, reaching a peak of 24.40 thousand tonnes in 1972-73. However, it started a nosedive thereafter, with the lowest level of production at 4.0 thousand tonnes in 1987-88. It, however, took an upward movement to reach 13.00 thousand tonnes in 1992-93. The trend rate of growth recorded a decline at (-)5.12% per annum during 1971-93. The rate of decline was (-)11.99% per annum in the second sub-period compared to (-)0.18% per annum in the first sub-period. The performance of the state in chilli production was poor compared to major chilli-growing states. For example, while Andhra Pradesh had a production of chilli at 320.67 thousand tonnes, it was only 7.90 thousand tonnes in Bihar in 1990-93. States like Karnataka, Maharashtra, Orissa, and Tamil Nadu were similarly much ahead of Bihar in chilli production. In terms of growth rate, it lagged far behind. In Andhra Pradesh, Orissa, and West Bengal, chilli production increased annually at 6.65%, 3.87%, and 8.92% respectively, but in Bihar, it declined annually at (-)5.31% during 1983-93.
Regional Pattern
Across different zones, it was the east and the north-west plains that excelled in chilli production in the state. While the east plains had a share of 41.11% in the State chilli production, it was 34.46% for the north-west plains. Across different districts:
Begusarai in the east plains and Rohtas in the south-west plains dominated in chilli production with shares of 32.35% and 21.84% respectively.
Other districts that produced chilli significantly included:
East Champaran (2.64%)
Muzaffarpur (2.65%)
Samastipur (6.75%)
Vaishali (3.05%) in the north-west plains
Muhger (1.04%) and Purnea (6.05%) in the east plains
Gaya (2.52%) and Patna (8.70%) in the south-west plains
Palamu (2.87%) in the plateau zone
The declining trend in chilli production was recorded in all four agro-climatic zones. However, the zones in the north Gangetic plains, i.e., north-west alluvial plains and east alluvial plains, displayed a higher rate of decline at (-)10.35% and (-)11.33% respectively compared to those in the south of the Ganges. It was (-)5.29% for the south-west alluvial plains and (-)6.32% for the plateau regions. During the first sub-period, the rate of decline was almost uniform across different zones. It, however, became quite sharp in the second sub-period with respect to the north-west alluvial plains (-22.69%), east-alluvial plains (-25.43%), and plateau districts (-19.72%). The south-west alluvial plains maintained almost a similar rate of decline (-5.0%) even in the second sub-period. The east alluvial plains experienced a reversal from an increasing trend (0.81%) in the first sub-period to a high rate of decline (-25.43%) in the second sub-period.
IV.10.5 Instability in Chilli Production
Despite the general declining trend in chilli production, there were districts that showed an increase in production during 1977-91. Such districts were those with less share in state chilli production. They included:
East Champaran (5.13%)
Muzaffarpur (5.01%)
Saran (5.33%)
West Champaran (3.54%)
Among the dominant chilli-growing districts, only Vaishali (5.85%) showed an increasing trend. Samastipur and Begusarai, the other dominant chilli-growing districts, recorded a sharp declining trend during the same period.
IV.10.6 Instability in Chilli Production
The rate of decline in chilli production was highly unstable with a coefficient of variation high at 31.60%. Across different agro-climatic zones, the rate of decline was relatively more stable in the south-west plains with a coefficient of variation at 24.98% compared to 35.00% in the north-west plains, 41.50% in the east plains, and 34.32% in the plateau districts. Analyzing the pattern across major chilli-growing districts, production in:
Madhubani
Begusarai
Patna
was unstable, with the coefficient of variation exceeding 50.0% in all such cases. The increasing trend in Rohtas and Purnea also showed instability with high coefficients of variation. The declining trend rates of growth in most of the districts were found to accelerate.
Analysis of Acceleration/Deceleration
The declining trend in the growth rate of chilli production in the State showed deceleration (-1.62%). Across different zones:
North-West: (-1.21%)
East: (-1.78%)
Plateau Zone: (-1.16%)
showed deceleration, while the south-west plains showed acceleration (0.31%) in the declining trend rates of growth. Analysis at the district level suggests that in:
Purnea: Acceleration in increasing growth rates at 0.77%
West Champaran: Acceleration at 0.25%
Districts such as Muzaffarpur, Saran, Sitamarhi, Vaishali, and Rohtas showed deceleration in their increasing growth rates. The declining trend rates of growth in most of the districts were, on the other hand, found to accelerate.
ii) Area under Chilli
The shrinkage in area under chilli was significantly large in the State. Area under chilli in the state was as high as 20.90 thousand hectares in 1970-71, which fell to 10.00 thousand hectares in 1980-81. It further slipped down to just 4.00 thousand hectares in 1987-88 and continued to hover around the same till 1991-92. In 1992-93, however, it picked up to reach 12.00 thousand hectares but remained still far below the 1970-71 level. The trend rate of growth showed a decline at (-)5.51% per annum during 1971-93. The rate of decline became sharper (-9.49%) in the second sub-period compared to the first sub-period (-3.21%). Compared to major chilli-growing states, the area under chilli was significantly low in Bihar. It was as high as:
224.50 thousand hectares in Andhra Pradesh
137.93 thousand hectares in Karnataka
128.80 thousand hectares in Maharashtra
93.13 thousand hectares in Orissa
whereas it was just 7.37 thousand hectares in Bihar in 1990-93. Again, while it showed expansion in Andhra Pradesh (3.01%) and Orissa (3.35%) during 1983-93, it showed a declining trend in Karnataka (-1.14%) and Maharashtra (-1.40%). The rate of decline was high in Bihar (-4.27%) during the same period.
IV.10.9 Regional Pattern
Zones/districts with high chilli production had also high area under it. For example, the east plains with maximum production of chilli (41.11%) had maximum area under chilli as well (48.39%). It was followed by the north-west plains (22.11%) and the south-west plains (20.10%). It was relatively much less in the plateau zone (9.40%). Across different districts, the area under chilli was maximum (40.49%) in Begusarai, followed by Samastipur (9.77%) and Rohtas (7.25%). Other districts with relatively high area under chilli included:
East Champaran (2.74%)
Muzaffarpur (2.51%)
Vaishali (3.45%) in the north-west plains
Purnea (4.16%) in the east plains
Gaya (4.23%) and Patna (5.24%) in the south-west plains
Palamu (5.53%) and Ranchi (1.86%) in the plateau zone
It is also observed that Rohtas with a share in chilli production at 21.84% had only 7.25% share in the State's chilli area. This was largely due to high yield level in this district.
IV.10.10 Shrinkage in Area under Chilli
Shrinkage in area under chilli was observed in all the agro-climatic zones during 1977-91. However, it was relatively high (-11.82%) in the north-west alluvial plains, followed by the east alluvial plains (-6.18%). The rate of decline was slightly less in respect of the south-west alluvial plains and plateau districts at (-2.84%) and (-4.37%) respectively during this period. Shrinkage in area was more prominent during the second sub-period in respect of the north-west alluvial plains (-18.91%) and east alluvial plains (-14.42%). In the case of the east alluvial plains, it was a case of reversal from increasing trend in the first sub-period (0.74%) to declining trend (-14.42%) in the second sub-period. The south-west alluvial plains and plateau districts showed declining trend in both the sub-periods. Across different districts, the area under chilli was recorded to expand in districts being less dominant in chilli cultivation. They included:
West Champaran (8.07%)
Saran (1.76%)
Nawadah (2.43%)
Rohtas (3.70%)
Hazaribagh (9.12%)
Ranchi (1.00%)
Districts dominant in chilli cultivation such as Begusarai, Samastipur, Rohtas, Patna, and Purnea showed declining trend in its area in the range of (-0.70%) and (-27.34%).
iii) Yield of Chilli
IV.10.11 Yield Trend
Unlike production and area, the yield of chilli showed an increasing trend in the state, albeit marginally. It was 0.79 tonnes/ha. in 1970-71, which showed upward movement reaching its peak at 1.24 tonnes/ha. in 1981-82. The yield, however, started declining from 1984-85, touching the minimum of 0.80 tonnes/ha. in 1988-89. The trend rate of growth in the yield of chilli was found to be increasing (0.54%) during 1971-93. However, it showed a declining trend at (-)2.50% per annum in the second sub-period as against an increasing trend of 3.29% per annum in the first sub-period. Comparing the yield level with other major chilli-growing states, it was found to be relatively high at 1.02 tonnes/ha. in 1990-93 for Bihar. It was only next to Andhra Pradesh (1.43 tonnes/ha.). In other states, it was much less at 0.29 tonnes/ha. in Karnataka, 0.50 tonnes/ha. in Maharashtra, and 0.81 tonnes/ha. in Orissa. In terms of growth rate, however, while it showed an increase in yield at 2.50% per annum at all-India level, 3.53% for Andhra Pradesh, and 0.50% for Orissa, it was declining at (-)1.52% in Bihar during 1983-93.
IV.10.12 Regional Pattern
Across different zones, the east plains excelled in chilli production as well as in area. However, in terms of yield, it was impressively high at 1.4 t/ha. in the south-west plains as against a low of 0.69 t/ha. in the east plains, 0.69 t/ha. in the north-west plains, and 0.50 t/ha. in the plateau zone. Across different districts, Rohtas emerged at the top with almost twice the yield level (0.25 t/ha.). Other districts to show relatively high yield included:
Bhojpur (0.15 t/ha.)
Patna (0.12 t/ha.) in the south-west plains
Katihar (0.14 t/ha.) and Purnea (0.12 t/ha.) in the east plains
In Begusarai, the largest chilli-growing district, the yield was much less at 0.65 t/ha. only. Among the districts of the north-west plains, the non-traditional chilli-growing districts showed higher yield than those in traditional chilli-growing districts. For example, it was high at 0.95 t/ha. in the non-traditional chilli-growing district of Gopalganj but low at 0.56 t/ha. in the traditional chilli-growing district of Samastipur.
IV.10.13 Trend Rates of Growth in Yield
Zonewise analysis of the trend rates of growth in the yield of chilli clearly demonstrated that only the north-west alluvial plains (1.47%) had an increasing trend in yield during 1977-91. All other agro-climatic zones showed a declining trend. The rate of decline was as high as (-)5.15% per annum in the case of the east alluvial plains and (-)2.45% in the south-west alluvial plains. In the plateau districts, it declined annually at (-)1.94%. Between the two sub-periods, it showed an increasing trend in the first sub-period at 2.90% in the north-west alluvial plains, 0.07% in the east alluvial plains, and 4.22% in the plateau districts. However, the trend reversed to a declining rate in the second sub-period in all these zones at (-)3.78%, (-)11.00%, and (-)14.82% respectively. The south-west alluvial plains showed a declining trend in both the sub-periods at (-)1.90% and (-)2.30% respectively.
IV.10.14 District Level Analysis
Across different districts, while the rate of growth in the yield of chilli was negative in most cases, there were districts that showed a high rate of growth during 1977-91. Such districts included:
East Champaran (6.20%)
Gopalganj (5.71%)
Saran (6.04%)
Siwan (6.21%)
Vaishali (10.21%)
West Champaran (6.10%)
Katihar (5.92%)
Purnea (5.19%)
Saharsa (4.63%)

V.11 Analysis of Acceleration/Deceleration
i) Acceleration/Deceleration in Growth Rate
IV.11.6 At the State level, the increasing trend rate of growth showed deceleration (-0.08%) during 1977-91. Between the two tobacco-growing zones, while the increasing trend rate of growth in the north-west plains showed acceleration (1.56%), the declining trend rate of growth in the east plains showed deceleration (-0.27%). Analysis across different districts suggests that the increasing trend growth rate in Samastipur showed acceleration (0.59%), but the declining trend in Vaishali showed deceleration (-0.24%). Most of the districts in these zones showed deceleration in their increasing trend growth rates. Districts with a declining trend also showed deceleration in their declining growth rates, except for Saran, where it was found to accelerate (0.24%).
ii) Area under Tobacco
IV.11.7 Area under tobacco showed upward movement from 1986-87 and continued rising up to 1992-93. In the preceding period (1971-86), it showed complete stagnation with area under tobacco hovering around 12-13 thousand ha. The trend rate of growth during 1971-93 was observed to be positive at 0.98% per annum. It speeded up to 1.37% in the second sub-period as against a declining trend at (-0.36%) per annum in the first sub-period. The trend growth rate in area was impressive for Bihar when compared with the declining trend at (-1.0%) at the all-India level, (-1.05%) in Andhra Pradesh, and (-1.38%) in Gujarat during 1983-93.
Regional Pattern
IV.11.8 Zones/districts with high production of tobacco also had high area under this crop. The north-west plains, with an overwhelming share in tobacco production, had the highest area under this crop, forming 92.78% of the State's total area under tobacco. Similar patterns were observed across different districts. Samastipur and Vaishali, showing maximum tobacco production, had overwhelming shares in tobacco area in the State—47.97% for Vaishali and 32.42% for Samastipur. Other districts with relatively high shares in tobacco area included:
Muzaffarpur (8.38%)
Gopalganj (1.09%)
Siwan in the north-west plains
Purnea (4.51%)
Begusarai (1.21%) in the east plains
IV.11.9 Among the two traditional tobacco-growing zones, the trend rate of growth was positive at 2.42% in the north-west alluvial plains and negative at (-3.18%) in the east alluvial plains during 1977-91. The increasing trend accelerated in the north-west zone from 1.54% in the first sub-period to 2.01% in the second sub-period. However, in the east alluvial plains, the declining trend accelerated from (-0.69%) in the first sub-period to (-5.80%) in the second sub-period.
IV.11.10 Among the districts, the area under tobacco showed an increasing trend in districts such as:
Darbhanga
Muzaffarpur
Samastipur
Sitamarhi
Begusarai
Vaishali
The growth rates ranged between 1.84% and 4.99%. Districts showing a decline in area included:
Saran
Madhubani
East Champaran
Siwan
Munger
Bhagalpur
Saharsa
These districts showed declines ranging between (-0.71%) and (-30.08%). Both the dominant tobacco-growing districts, Vaishali and Samastipur, showed expansion in their area. Districts such as Begusarai, Siwan, and Sitamarhi, which were less dominant in production, recorded expansion in their area.
iii) Yield of Tobacco
IV.11.11 Performance in the yield of tobacco was not encouraging in the state. It was 890 kg/ha in 1970-71, showing ups and downs in subsequent years. The maximum yield was 1270 kg/ha in 1987-88. The yield started declining afterwards, reaching only 570 kg/ha in 1992-93. The rate of growth in yield was positive at 1.30% per annum during 1971-93. It showed an increasing trend (1.23%) in the first sub-period and a declining trend (-2.98%) in the second sub-period. The yield of tobacco in Bihar was lower compared to the all-India level and major tobacco-producing states. It was 1370 kg/ha at the all-India level, 1220 kg/ha in Andhra Pradesh, 1730 kg/ha in Gujarat, and 3640 kg/ha in Uttar Pradesh in 1990-93, as against 650 kg/ha in Bihar. The growth rate had been positive at the all-India level as well as in those states during the eighties, while it was negative in Bihar.
Regional Pattern
IV.11.12 Zone-wise/district-wise analysis of the yield of tobacco as a triennial average in 1988-91 showed that it was relatively higher in zones/districts with high tobacco production. For example, it was the highest at 1.02 t/ha in the north-west plains, the dominant tobacco-growing zone, and 0.90 t/ha in the east plains. Across different districts, yield was not necessarily high in districts producing more tobacco. For example, it was only 0.95 t/ha in Vaishali, the major tobacco-growing district, but 1.3 t/ha in Madhubani, a lesser producer of tobacco. Other districts showing high yield of tobacco included:
Darbhanga (1.19 t/ha.)
Gopalganj (1.0 t/ha.)
Samastipur (1.55 t/ha.)
West Champaran (1.0 t/ha.)
IV.11.13 Analysis of the trend rate of growth in tobacco yield across different zones suggests that while the north-west alluvial plains showed an increasing trend (3.04%), it was declining (-1.43%) in the east alluvial plains during 1971-91. Yield recorded an increasing trend in both zones in both sub-periods. However, the rate of growth increased from 1.09% in the first sub-period to 2.09% in the second sub-period in the north-west plains, and it showed accelerated growth from 2.58% in the first sub-period to 4.11% in the second sub-period in the east plains.
IV.11.14 The trend rate of growth was positive across different districts of the north-west alluvial plains during 1977-91, ranging from 2.13% to 6.23%. All these districts continued to show an increasing trend in yield even during the second sub-period. In some districts, it even accelerated to higher growth levels. Such districts included:
Madhubani (9.65%)
Darbhanga (6.25%)
In the case of Samastipur, it reversed from a high rate of declining trend (-5.07%) in the first sub-period to an increasing trend (5.02%) in the second sub-period.
IV.11.15 Districts of the east alluvial plains, on the other hand, presented a contrasting picture, where most showed a declining trend rate of growth in yield of tobacco during 1977-91, ranging from (-1.99%) to (-2.53%). Amidst this scenario, however, there were districts showing increased yield. They included:
Begusarai (1.78%)
Bhagalpur (0.57%)
Munger (1.84%)
Begusarai and Bhagalpur showed a reversal from a declining trend in the first sub-period to an increasing trend in the second sub-period. On the other hand, districts such as Saharsa, Purnea, and Katihar showed a reversal from an increasing trend in the first sub-period to a declining trend in the second sub-period. Munger continued to show a declining trend in both sub-periods.

V.11 Conclusions
IV.11.16 Analysis thus suggests the following broad conclusions in respect of trend and pattern of growth in tobacco production in the State:
Bihar's Status in Tobacco Production
Bihar was one of the major tobacco-growing states until the early seventies. However, by the early nineties, this status was relegated to the background. While most of the major tobacco-growing states recorded impressive increases in tobacco production, Bihar showed a declining trend during the eighties.
Decline in Production
The decline in tobacco production was largely due to a sharp decline in yield of tobacco, as the area under tobacco recorded an increasing trend.
Regional Production
Tobacco production in the State was region-specific, with the north-west plains being the major producer, particularly the districts of Vaishali and Samastipur, which produced the lion's share.
Yield Comparison
While most districts showed lower yields of tobacco, some districts compared well with the national average. However, yields were much lower compared to Gujarat and Uttar Pradesh.
Major Districts
Both Samastipur and Vaishali, the major tobacco-growing districts, showed an increasing trend in tobacco production with both area and yield showing an increasing trend.
Concern Over Declining Trend
Seen in the context of the state being traditional in tobacco production, its declining trend in tobacco production is a serious cause of concern.
Table IV.11.1
Area, Production, and Yield of Tobacco in Bihar during 1971-93
Table IV.11.2
Compound Annual Rate of Growth (%)
Figures in parentheses indicate the level of significance.

CHAPTER V
CROPPING PATTERN AND AREA SHIFTS ACROSS DIFFERENT DISTRICTS
The question of which crop dominates in area coverage and the trend and pattern of area shifts across different crops over time in Bihar is significant, particularly in the context of growing emphasis on crop diversification and commercialization. The following paragraphs address these questions. Analysis of cropping patterns across different zones/districts has been made using data on the area under different crops/crop groups over time. The percentage share of different crops/crop groups in total cropped area is taken to reflect the cropping pattern. Analysis of area shifts across different crops/crop groups has been made at the state level, considering the period from 1970-71 to 1992-93. The trend rate of growth in the percentage share of different crops/crop groups during the period under reference is taken to reflect the direction and rate of shift in area across different crops/crop groups.
Cropping Pattern
V.2 Analysis of area under different crops/crop groups, as well as their percentage share in the state in 1988-91, indicated that food crops dominated agriculture with a share of 91.77% in the total cropped area. Non-food crops formed a low share at 8.23%. Among the food crops, cereals constituted as high as 80.50%, and pulses 11.27% of the total cropped area. Among the cereals, crops such as paddy (50.58%), followed by wheat (20.57%) and maize (7.13%), were the most important. Among pulses, gram constituted 1.53%, arhar 0.68%, and other pulses 9.06%.
Among non-food crops, a wide range of crops were produced in the state. However, the most important ones were:
Rapeseed/mustard (1.10%)
Linseed (0.72%)
Jute (1.53%)
Potato (1.74%)
Sugarcane (1.48%)
Besides, cash crops such as tobacco (0.16%), chillies (0.07%), turmeric (0.03%), and coriander (0.02%) were also important in a few pockets of the state.
V.3 Analysis of cropping patterns across different zones/districts suggests that while in the plateau zone, the paddy crop (66.38%) alone was dominant among cereal crops, in other zones such as the north-west, south-west, and east plains, wheat was also an important cereal crop with its share at 24.7%, 27.27%, and 19.03%, respectively. Additionally, maize formed a significant proportion in the north-west (7.57%) and the east alluvial plains (11.81%). It is further observed that while paddy and wheat were cultivated in almost equal measure in all the districts of the plains, cultivation of maize was specific to select districts such as Samastipur, Saran, Vaishali, Begusarai, Bhagalpur, Saharsa, and Palamu.

V.4 Analysis of Area Under Pulses
Analysis of the area under pulses across different zones/districts suggests that while pulses were cultivated in all zones/districts, some zones/districts were more prominent in their cultivation. The zones of:
South-West (16.43%)
East Alluvial Plains (11.98%)
were relatively more dominant in pulse cultivation. Districts that figured prominently in pulse area included:
Darbhanga (12.60%)
Muzaffarpur (13.67%)
Vaishali (12.29%) in the north-west
Bhagalpur (13.94%)
Munger (16.12%)
Saharsa (18.23%) in the east plains
Aurangabad (18.12%)
Nalanda (17.51%)
Patna (29.66%) in the south-west plains
Palamu (20.33%) in the plateau zone
V.5 Major Non-Food Crops
Among the non-food crops, the major ones were:
Rapeseed/Mustard
Sugarcane
Potato
Tobacco
Chilli
Jute
Analysis suggests that the cultivation of these crops was area/region specific:
Rapeseed/Mustard was more prominent in the East Plains (1.48%) and the North-West Plains (0.97%).
Sugarcane was dominated by the North-West (3.51%).
Potato was almost uniformly spread across different zones.
Tobacco was restricted to the North-West Plains.
Jute was the specialty of the East Plains.
V.6 Area Shifts Across Different Crops
It is significant to observe that there was a shift of area in favor of:
Cereal Crops
Fruits and Vegetables
Fibre Crops
with trend rates of growth per annum in the percentage area of these crops positive at:
0.22% for cereals
1.65% for fruits and vegetables
0.37% for fibre crops
On the other hand, crop groups such as:
Pulses
Oilseeds
Spices
Miscellaneous Crops
were losing area to other crops, with trend rates of growth declining annually at:
(-1.35%) for pulses
(-0.27%) for oilseeds
(-4.80%) for spices
(-0.26%) for miscellaneous crops during the same period.
(i) Cereals
V.7 Between the two sub-periods, area expansion was higher in the second sub-period compared to the first. Analysis of trend rates of growth separately for superior and coarse cereals suggests that:
Superior Cereals gained in area with a trend rate of growth at 0.63%.
Coarse Cereals showed shrinkage in area with a trend rate of growth at (-2.13%) during this period.
V.8 Area expansion of superior cereals slackened in the second sub-period with a trend rate of growth at 0.23% per annum, whereas it was 0.43% per annum in the first sub-period. Coarse cereals showed an opposite trend, with the second sub-period recovering in the declining trend. While it declined annually at (-1.22%) in the first sub-period, the declining trend slackened to (-0.08%) in the second sub-period.
(ii) Fruits and Vegetables
V.9 Fruits and vegetables showed a high rate of area expansion at 11.15% per annum during the first sub-period. The second sub-period showed a reversal to a declining trend, albeit marginally at (-1.0%) per annum. Production of fruits (mainly banana) and vegetables (mainly potato and onion) picked up fast in Bihar during the late seventies and continued up to the mid-eighties.
(iii) Pulses
V.10 Area under pulses showed shrinkage consistently since 1970-71. However, the rate of decline was higher at (-2.02%) per annum in the first sub-period and lower at (-1.20%) per annum in the second sub-period. The deceleration in the declining trend rate of growth in the second sub-period could largely be due to the fact that it reached a minimum level below which further decline could not be possible to ensure a minimum supply of pulses at the farm level.
(iv) Oilseeds
V.11 In the case of oilseed crops, the first sub-period witnessed significant area expansion growing annually at 3.16%. The second sub-period, however, experienced a stagnant situation with a trend rate of growth, although declining but low at (-0.10%).
(v) Spices
V.12 Spices also showed a declining trend in area. It had a share of 0.27% in the gross cropped area in 1970-71, which continued to decline, reaching the lowest level of 0.08% in 1990-91. The rate of decline in the percentage share has been steep in both sub-periods, (-6.35%) in the first sub-period and (-6.00%) in the second sub-period. Prominent spice crops produced in Bihar include chili, turmeric, coriander, and garlic. They are mostly cultivated for the market. Prices of spices have been increasing in recent years, making the shrinkage in area under spices a puzzle that needs further investigation.
Area Shifts of Individual Cereal Crops
V.13 Both superior cereals, such as paddy and wheat, showed area expansion during 1971-93. However, gains in area expansion for wheat (1.50% per annum) were much higher compared to paddy (0.10% per annum). Further:
Wheat showed area expansion almost uniformly in both sub-periods at 1.52% and 1.26%, respectively.
Paddy showed shrinkage in area at (-0.48%) per annum in the second sub-period.
Thus, while paddy formed 63.83% of the total cereals area in 1970-71, it reduced to 57.64% in 1992-93. In the case of wheat, while it formed 15.92% in 1970-71, it increased to 26.25% in 1992-93. For jowar and bajra, the shrinkage in area became more prominent and sharp at (-4.19%) and (-4.39%) per annum, respectively, in the second sub-period. The percentage share of these crops in total cereals area reduced to 0.05% and 0.10%, respectively, in 1992-93.
V.14 Maize was once a prominent coarse cereal in Bihar, occupying around 12.0% of the total cereals area in 1970-71. Area under maize remained stagnant, hovering around 10.0% up to 1981-82, and declined thereafter, forming around 8.0% to 9.0% of the total cereals area. While the first sub-period witnessed a decline at (-0.54%) per annum, it showed marginal improvement in the second sub-period with a rate of growth reversing to an increasing trend at 0.07% per annum. Loss of area under coarse cereals, particularly maize, occurred largely in favor of superior cereals, mainly wheat. Maize is sown in both Kharif and Rabi seasons. With the relative economics of wheat being more favorable due to high relative prices, farmers seemed to substitute wheat for maize. Moreover, it was also a substitution of coarse cereals for superior cereals. Ragi was another important coarse cereal to lose its area significantly to superior cereals in the second sub-period with a trend rate of growth at (-5.01%) per annum.
V.15 Analysis of area shifts among pulses was more revealing. Pulse's shares in the gross cropped area showed a significant decline, suggesting loss of pulse area to other crops, mainly superior cereals. It formed 14.90% of the gross cropped area in 1970-71, which reduced to 10.23% in 1992-93. Among pulses:
Arhar and gram continued to show a declining trend at (-1.14%) and (-0.80%), respectively.
Other pulses showed an increasing trend at 0.26% during 1971-93.
Analyzing the trend of area shifts across two sub-periods:
Arhar and gram experienced area shifts in both sub-periods.
Other pulses gained area in both sub-periods.
Other pulse crops include mainly masoor, urad, and khesari. With an increase in irrigation and other crops having less favorable economics of cultivation, the context of spurt in arhar prices makes the significant shrinkage of arhar area puzzling and needs further examination. Loss of gram area could largely be attributed to vagaries of nature, as it is cultivated under rainfed conditions. Pulses like masoor and urad are also cultivated under rainfed conditions but have greater resistance to withstand dry spells. Farmers cultivate more of other pulses, substituting gram or arhar largely to ensure minimum pulse production for self-consumption.
V.16 Oilseeds showed shrinkage in area in both sub-periods, with almost equal intensity, losing to other crops, mainly cereals. However, when examining the trend and pattern of area shifts across oilseed crops themselves, it is significant to observe that while rapeseed/mustard showed encouraging gains in area, linseed and nigerseed showed a loss of area. Increasing area under rapeseed/mustard began in the early eighties, showing expansion from 1981-82 with a share at 35.57% in total oilseeds area to as high as 55.57% in 1992-93. Shifts in area in its favor were observed at 3.22% per annum during the second sub-period as against the declining trend at (-0.16%) during the first sub-period. In the case of linseed, the reversal in area started in the second sub-period with a trend rate of growth at (-2.98%) as against the increasing trend rate of growth at 1.73% in the first sub-period. Nigerseed was the worst loser with its share at 25.0% in 1970-71, but reducing to 13.68% in 1992-93. The rate of decline was equally high in its case in both sub-periods at (-2.90%) and (-2.57%), respectively.
V.17 Fibre Crops
Among the three major fibre crops, namely:
Jute
Mesta
Sunhemp
Jute gained in its relative share in area, forming 76.55% of the area under fibre crops in 1970-71, increasing to 81.45% in 1992-93, recording an annual rate of growth at 0.38% during this period. Shift in area was more prominent during the second sub-period with a trend rate of growth at 0.29% as against 0.15% in the first sub-period. Sunhemp showed a reversal in its relative share in the second sub-period with a declining rate of growth at (-2.68%), whereas during the first sub-period it showed an increasing rate of growth at 2.55% per annum. Mesta, only next to jute among the fibre crops, showed a declining trend rate of growth during both sub-periods, at (-1.34%) in the first sub-period and (-0.82%) in the second sub-period.
V.18 Spices
Turmeric and chillies were the two major spice crops cultivated in Bihar. The relative share of spice crops showed a declining trend during both sub-periods, implying a loss of their area to other crops. However, analysis of the relative share of chili and turmeric throws significant light:
Chili gained in area during the first sub-period with a trend growth rate increasing annually at 0.81%, but reversed to a declining trend in the second sub-period at (-1.96%) per annum.
Turmeric showed a loss in area during the first sub-period at (-1.66%) per annum but reversed to an increasing trend at 4.19% per annum in the second sub-period.
V.19 Sugarcane and Tobacco
The relative share of sugarcane and tobacco is analyzed in terms of their share in gross cropped area:
Sugarcane gained in its share impressively during the second sub-period at 2.85% as against a declining trend in the first sub-period at (-1.38%) per annum.
Tobacco showed gains in area during both sub-periods, with a relatively higher gain of 2.27% in the second sub-period compared to 0.82% in the first sub-period.

CHAPTER V: ANALYSIS OF AREA SHIFTS ACROSS CROPS
V.20 Conclusions
The following broad conclusions may thus be arrived at on the basis of the foregoing discussions with regard to the trend and pattern of area shifts across various crops and crop groups:
i. Bihar agriculture continues to be dominant in foodgrains production with its area at 91.77% in 1990-93. Among the food crops, it was essentially cereals (80.50%) which was prominent, as pulses area covered 11.27% only. Paddy, wheat, and maize were the major cereal crops.
ii. Non-food crops constituted merely 8.23% of the gross cropped area in the state. Among the non-food crops, rapeseed/mustard, linseed, jute, mesta, potato, and sugarcane had a dominant share. Chilli, turmeric, coriander, and tobacco were also grown in the state, but in specific regions only.
iii. Over the years, there was a clear shift of area in favor of cereals, fruits and vegetables, and fibre crops. On the other hand, crop groups such as pulses, oilseeds, spices, and miscellaneous crops showed a loss of area.
iv. Among the cereals, while superior cereals gained in area, coarse cereals recorded a loss of area. In the case of pulses, while arhar and gram recorded a loss of area, other pulses showed gains in area.
v. While oilseeds in general showed a loss of area, rapeseed/mustard recorded impressive gains in area. Linseed and nigerseed showed a loss of area.
vi. Among the fibre crops, jute alone showed gains in area, whereas mesta and sunhemp recorded a loss of area. Turmeric and chillies, among the spices crops, also showed a significant loss of area. Sugarcane recorded impressive gains in area.
CHAPTER VI: YIELD INCREASE - CROP-WISE COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS
The question of which crop has gained in yield expansion over these years becomes important to understand the relative position of a crop vis-a-vis other crops in yield gains to facilitate policy decisions. The present chapter seeks to address this question at the State level. For this purpose, major crops alone were considered. The period under consideration is 1970-71 to 1992-93. For each of these years, yield per hectare is arrived at from the area and production data. For each of these crops, trend growth rates were worked out in their yield levels to reflect the rate of change as well as direction of change for the period during 1970-71 to 1992-93. Trend rates of growth in the yield of these crops were worked out separately for two sub-periods as well.
a) Cereal Crops
VI.2 Across various cereal crops, the yield of maize was increasing annually at 3.49% per annum during 1971-93. Ragi and small millets followed with trend rates of growth at 2.67% per annum for both crops. Jowar and barley recorded growth in yield at 2.24% and 2.07% respectively. Wheat recorded a growth rate in its yield at 1.77%, which was much less than that of maize or for that matter even ragi and small millets. Rice and bajra showed the lowest rates of yield increase at 1.30% and 1.18% per annum respectively.
VI.3 Analysis of trend rates of growth in the yield of these crops in two sub-periods was more revealing. In the case of crops like rice, maize, ragi, small millets, wheat, and barley, the increase in yield speeded up in the second sub-period. It was as high as 5.14% for maize and 4.27% for small millets. Wheat, ragi, and rice experienced similar rates of yield increase during this period at 2.19%, 2.46%, and 2.28% respectively. The case of ragi was more impressive, as the trend reversed from a declining rate at (-0.76%) in the first sub-period to an increasing rate, that too at a high level at 4.27% in the second sub-period. Bajra, on the other hand, showed a picture in contrast. While it showed an increasing trend in yield at 2.50% in the first sub-period, it reversed to a declining trend at (-6.47%) in the second sub-period. Among the food crops, bajra and jowar alone showed a reversal in the growth of yield, particularly during the second sub-period.
b) Pulses
VI.4 Among the pulses, arhar showed a higher rate of yield increase at 2.87% compared to gram at 2.13% and other pulses at 1.63% during 1971-93. Growth rates in the yield were higher in the second sub-period for all the pulses, more so for other pulses at 2.23%. The case of other pulses was still more impressive in the second sub-period in the context of a declining trend at (-0.57%) in the first sub-period. Higher growth response in the yield of pulses, including those of miscellaneous types during the second sub-period, could be attributed largely to the emergence of HYV seeds for most of them and their wider and extensive application, even under unirrigated conditions.
c) Oilseeds
VI.5 Rapeseed/mustard, linseed, and nigerseed are the major oilseeds cultivated in Bihar. Among these crops, rapeseed/mustard showed impressive growth in their yield. It increased at 2.58% during 1971-93. Nigerseed also had a relatively better growth response at 1.81% during this period. Linseed, on the other hand, showed a more or less stagnant picture with yield increasing marginally at 0.60% per annum.
VI.6 Rapeseed/mustard, on the contrary, gained momentum in yield more significantly during the second sub-period with an annual growth rate in yield at 3.07%. More importantly, it showed a reversal from a declining trend at (-0.83%) in the first sub-period to an increasing trend at 3.07% in the second sub-period. In the case of nigerseed, however, the second sub-period witnessed slackening in the growth rate of yield at 1.74% as against an annual growth rate of 2.30% in the first sub-period. For linseed, the growth rate in yield was negligible in the second sub-period.
d) Other Crops
VI.7 Other crops included jute, chilli, potato, sugarcane, and tobacco. Among these crops, jute showed relatively more impressive performance in yield increase at 2.53% per annum during 1971-93. It was followed by tobacco (1.29%) and sugarcane (1.04%). In the case of chilli, yield took a reversal from an increasing trend (3.29%) in the first sub-period to a declining trend (-2.50%) in the second sub-period. Potato, on the other hand, maintained a declining trend in yield in both sub-periods. It was (-1.0%) in the first sub-period and (-0.19%) in the second sub-period. Jute showed marginal improvement in the yield level from 1.24% in the first sub-period to 1.65% in the second sub-period. Tobacco showed a reversal from an increasing trend (1.23%) in the first sub-period to a declining trend (-2.98%) in the second sub-period. Sugarcane, on the other hand, showed a more impressive turnaround from a declining trend (-1.47%) in the first sub-period to an increasing trend (6.02%) in the second sub-period.
VI.8 Increase in the yield of foodgrains recorded better performance, especially during the second sub-period. The rate of growth in the yield of maize and small millets was relatively higher. Wheat and rice showed relatively low increases in yield. Among the non-food crops, rapeseed/mustard and sugarcane recorded impressive growth rates in yield. Crops such as chilli and tobacco recorded a reversal in their yield from an increasing trend in the first sub-period to a declining trend in the second sub-period.


CHAPTER VII
TREND AND PATTERN OF LAND USE - ZONE-WISE/DISTRICT-WISE ANALYSIS
The present chapter seeks to address the question of how the land use pattern has been changing over the years and how it varies across different agro-climatic zones/districts in Bihar. These questions assume significance in the context of output maximization on the one hand and constraints in the adaptation of modern technology on the other. This calls for the adoption of a land policy to ensure optimum use of land.
a) Land Use Pattern - An Aggregate Analysis
VII.2 Despite vast geographical spread, the availability of agricultural land was relatively low in Bihar. It was 62.5% in the state as against 86.0% in Haryana, 86.7% in Punjab, 68.1% in Uttar Pradesh, and 66.5% in West Bengal. This was largely due to high forest area (17.0%) on the one hand and large non-agricultural land (18.1%) on the other. Net sown area was still low in Bihar at 45.40% as compared to states such as Haryana, Punjab, West Bengal, and Uttar Pradesh where it formed as high as 81.7%, 83.8%, 60.3%, and 58.1% respectively. In terms of per capita availability, the net sown area was low at 0.09 ha for Bihar as against 0.22 ha for Haryana, 0.21 ha for Punjab, and 0.12 ha for Uttar Pradesh. Again, the share of net sown area to total reporting area was found to be declining in Bihar over these years. It formed 49.38% in 1950-51, declined to 47.98% in 1980-81, and 45.40% in 1990-91. The rate of decline was (-)0.93% per annum during 1977-91. Part of the low net sown area could be seen in relatively high fallow land (10.42%), culturable waste (16.29%), and barren land (5.6%) in the state. At the all-India level, fallow land was only 7.36%, culturable waste was 4.95%, and barren land was 5.93%. In Punjab and Haryana, the share of fallow, waste, and barren land was relatively low at 4.50% and 6.60% respectively.
VII.3 Barren land and cultivable waste land declined annually at (-)1.64% each in the state. However, fallow land, both permanent and current, showed an increasing trend at 0.74% and 0.80% respectively, ultimately leading to the shrinkage in net sown area in the State.
VII.4 Comparing the land use pattern in Bihar with that at the all-India level, it is observed that the area under forest showed an increasing trend in both Bihar (0.34%) and at the all-India level (0.20%). Land under non-agricultural use also increased, however, more at the all-India level (1.50%) than in Bihar (0.47%). In the case of miscellaneous trees, while Bihar showed an increasing trend (1.70%), it was declining at the all-India level (-0.80%). Fallow land, both permanent and current, increased in Bihar as well as at the all-India level. However, the rate of increase in permanent fallow was more for Bihar (0.74%) than at the all-India level (0.58%). The rate of increase in current fallow was more at the all-India level (1.19%) than in Bihar (0.80%). Net sown area declined both in Bihar and at the all-India level. However, the rate of decline was significantly high in Bihar at (-)0.77% as against (-)0.05% at the all-India level.
b) Land Use Pattern - Regional Analysis
VII.5 Across different zones, the net sown area constituted around half of the reporting area in the northern plain areas. However, in the plateau region, the net sown area constituted only one-fourth (25.21%) of the reporting area, while around one-third of the area (29.46%) was under forest. In all the four agro-climatic zones, the net sown area showed a declining trend. The rate of decline was as high as (-)1.54% in the plateau region and as low as (-)0.47% in the south-west alluvial plains. Part of the decline in net sown area was due to expanding areas under miscellaneous trees and other waste land, particularly in the north-west alluvial plains and the east alluvial plains. In the plateau region, increasing current fallow and barren land contributed more to the declining net sown area. In the south-west alluvial plains, part of the decline in net sown area was caused by expanding other waste land and barren land.
c) Intensity of Land Use for Crop Culture
VII.6 The land available for cultivation cannot be expanded in the short run, given the physical constraints on the one hand and limitations of resources for investments on the other. In such a situation, the other alternative to maximize crop output is to raise more crops in different crop seasons on the same piece of land. In other words, it implies raising crop intensity of the land. In the context of declining net sown areas, raising crop intensity assumes more importance. Implicitly, crop intensity is influenced largely by favorable monsoons on the one hand and availability of modern technology, mainly irrigation, on the other. Over these years, there have been rapid strides in the expansion of improved technologies in Bihar agriculture as well. Before addressing the question of what the determinants of crop intensity are and whether it has kept pace with increasing use of modern technologies, it is more pertinent to examine how it varies across different agro-climatic zones/districts and what has been the trend in its growth over a period of time.
VII.7 Crop intensity for Bihar was 136.1% in 1990-91. Over the years, it showed a marginal improvement in crop intensity from 129.0% in 1971-72 to 135.2% in 1981-82 and 136.1% in 1990-91. Compared to the all-India average of 130.4%, Bihar presents a better picture in crop intensity. However, in comparison to cropping intensity in states like Punjab (177.7%) and Haryana (165.4%), it is much less in Bihar. States such as West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, and Orissa were also ahead of Bihar with crop intensity at 162.5%, 147.3%, and 152.2% respectively. All these states gained in crop intensity in the range of 27.5% as in Orissa to 10.8% as in Uttar Pradesh, whereas in Bihar it improved by 5.5% only over the same period.
VII.8 Across different agro-climatic zones/districts, the plateau districts showed relatively low crop intensity at 109% only. Among the alluvial plains, it was relatively high in the north-west zone (149%), followed by the east zone (143%). The south-west zone showed crop intensity at 140%. Analyzing crop intensity across different districts, it is observed that districts such as Darbhanga, Gopalganj, and Siwan in the north-west plains showed high crop intensity at 171%, 184%, and 165% respectively. Districts such as Muzaffarpur, Saran, and Vaishali had moderately high crop intensity ranging between 150% and 155%. It was, however, much less in Madhubani (134%) and East Champaran (128%).
VII.9 Among the districts of the east alluvial plains, only Begusarai, Katihar, and Saharsa showed relatively high crop intensity at 155%, 161%, and 154% respectively. Bhagalpur and Munger, on the contrary, showed relatively low crop intensity at 122% and 123% respectively. Among the districts of the south-west alluvial plains, Rohtas alone showed crop intensity (150%) comparable to districts in the north-west and east alluvial plains. In other districts, it was modest in the range of 137% as in Patna and 144% as in Nalanda. Crop intensity among the districts of the plateau zone was dismally low in the range of 114% as in Hazaribagh and 103% as in Singhbhum.
d) Area Sown More Than Once
VII.10 Area sown more than once showed an increasing trend in most of the agro-climatic zones. It was increasing at 0.42% per annum in the north-west alluvial plains, 0.38% per annum in the east alluvial plains, and 1.09% per annum in the south-west alluvial plains. The plateau districts, on the contrary, showed a declining trend at (-)1.49% per annum. Amidst the general scenario of expanding area sown more than once, most of the districts in the north-west alluvial plains showed a declining trend. Such districts included Madhubani, Samastipur, Saran, Sitamarhi, Vaishali, and West Champaran. The rate of decline was as high as (-)1.90% in West Champaran and as low as (-)0.06% in Samastipur. Districts showing expansion in area sown more than once included Muzaffarpur (4.22%), Gopalganj (2.72%), Darbhanga (1.35%), East Champaran (0.81%), and Siwan (1.21%).
VII.11 In the east alluvial plains, only Munger and Purnea showed a declining trend at (-)5.08% and (-)0.36% respectively. In all other districts, it showed expansion in the range of 4.12% per annum as in Begusarai and 0.44% as in Bhagalpur. Districts of the south-west alluvial plains, on the contrary, showed uniformity in the expansion of area sown more than once, increasing in the range of 1.89% as in Nalanda and 1.29% as in Gaya. The scenario among the districts of the plateau zone was different with some of the districts showing a high rate of decline. The rate of decline was as high as (-)9.22% in Santhal Parganas and (-)2.03% in Dhanbad. Districts such as Singhbhum, Hazaribagh, Palamu, and Ranchi, however, showed an increasing trend in area sown more than once at 6.21%, 1.90%, and 1.61% respectively.
e) Gross Cropped Area
VII.12 In the context of expanding area sown more than once, gross cropped area showed shrinkage in most of the agro-climatic zones and districts. All the zones of the north-west alluvial plains, south-west alluvial plains, east alluvial plains, and plateau districts showed a declining trend in gross cropped area at (-)0.62%, (-)0.45%, (-)0.15%, and (-)2.31% respectively. The declining trend was far and wide among the districts of the north-west, in the range of (-)1.83% as in Sitamarhi and (-)0.03% as in Siwan. Amidst such a scenario, Gopalganj and Muzaffarpur showed expansion in gross cropped area at 0.51% and 1.65% respectively.
VII.13 Shrinkage in gross cropped area was more widespread among the districts of the east alluvial plains with Munger showing a high rate of decline at (-)3.99% per annum. Bhagalpur, on the other hand, showed minimal shrinkage in gross cropped area at (-)0.09% per annum. Begusarai and Saharsa showed expansion in gross cropped area at 3.50% and 0.49% per annum respectively. Districts of the south-west alluvial plains also showed a decline in gross cropped area, although at modest rates ranging between (-)0.74% as in Aurangabad and 0.16% as in Patna. Nalanda was the lone district in this zone to show expansion in gross cropped area at 0.11% per annum. In contrast to the districts of the south-west alluvial plains, the districts of the plateau region showed a declining trend uniformly with the only exception of Dhanbad. It ranged between (-)5.53% as in Ranchi and (-)0.48% as in Hazaribagh.

CHAPTER VII
TREND AND PATTERN OF LAND USE - ZONE-WISE/DISTRICT-WISE ANALYSIS
The present chapter seeks to address the question of how the land use pattern has been changing over the years and how it varies across different agro-climatic zones/districts in Bihar. These questions assume significance in the context of output maximization on the one hand and constraints in the adaptation of modern technology on the other. This calls for the adoption of a land policy to ensure optimum use of land.
a) Land Use Pattern - An Aggregate Analysis
VII.2 Despite vast geographical spread, the availability of agricultural land was relatively low in Bihar. It was 62.5% in the state as against 86.0% in Haryana, 86.7% in Punjab, 68.1% in Uttar Pradesh, and 66.5% in West Bengal. This was largely due to high forest area (17.0%) on the one hand and large non-agricultural land (18.1%) on the other. Net sown area was still low in Bihar at 45.40% as compared to states such as Haryana, Punjab, West Bengal, and Uttar Pradesh where it formed as high as 81.7%, 83.8%, 60.3%, and 58.1% respectively. In terms of per capita availability, the net sown area was low at 0.09 ha for Bihar as against 0.22 ha for Haryana, 0.21 ha for Punjab, and 0.12 ha for Uttar Pradesh. Again, the share of net sown area to total reporting area was found to be declining in Bihar over these years. It formed 49.38% in 1950-51, declined to 47.98% in 1980-81, and 45.40% in 1990-91. The rate of decline was (-)0.93% per annum during 1977-91. Part of the low net sown area could be seen in relatively high fallow land (10.42%), culturable waste (16.29%), and barren land (5.6%) in the state. At the all-India level, fallow land was only 7.36%, culturable waste was 4.95%, and barren land was 5.93%. In Punjab and Haryana, the share of fallow, waste, and barren land was relatively low at 4.50% and 6.60% respectively.
VII.3 Barren land and cultivable waste land declined annually at (-)1.64% each in the state. However, fallow land, both permanent and current, showed an increasing trend at 0.74% and 0.80% respectively, ultimately leading to the shrinkage in net sown area in the State.
VII.4 Comparing the land use pattern in Bihar with that at the all-India level, it is observed that the area under forest showed an increasing trend in both Bihar (0.34%) and at the all-India level (0.20%). Land under non-agricultural use also increased, however, more at the all-India level (1.50%) than in Bihar (0.47%). In the case of miscellaneous trees, while Bihar showed an increasing trend (1.70%), it was declining at the all-India level (-0.80%). Fallow land, both permanent and current, increased in Bihar as well as at the all-India level. However, the rate of increase in permanent fallow was more for Bihar (0.74%) than at the all-India level (0.58%). The rate of increase in current fallow was more at the all-India level (1.19%) than in Bihar (0.80%). Net sown area declined both in Bihar and at the all-India level. However, the rate of decline was significantly high in Bihar at (-)0.77% as against (-)0.05% at the all-India level.
b) Land Use Pattern - Regional Analysis
VII.5 Across different zones, the net sown area constituted around half of the reporting area in the northern plain areas. However, in the plateau region, the net sown area constituted only one-fourth (25.21%) of the reporting area, while around one-third of the area (29.46%) was under forest. In all the four agro-climatic zones, the net sown area showed a declining trend. The rate of decline was as high as (-)1.54% in the plateau region and as low as (-)0.47% in the south-west alluvial plains. Part of the decline in net sown area was due to expanding areas under miscellaneous trees and other waste land, particularly in the north-west alluvial plains and the east alluvial plains. In the plateau region, increasing current fallow and barren land contributed more to the declining net sown area. In the south-west alluvial plains, part of the decline in net sown area was caused by expanding other waste land and barren land.
c) Intensity of Land Use for Crop Culture
VII.6 The land available for cultivation cannot be expanded in the short run, given the physical constraints on the one hand and limitations of resources for investments on the other. In such a situation, the other alternative to maximize crop output is to raise more crops in different crop seasons on the same piece of land. In other words, it implies raising crop intensity of the land. In the context of declining net sown areas, raising crop intensity assumes more importance. Implicitly, crop intensity is influenced largely by favorable monsoons on the one hand and availability of modern technology, mainly irrigation, on the other. Over these years, there have been rapid strides in the expansion of improved technologies in Bihar agriculture as well. Before addressing the question of what the determinants of crop intensity are and whether it has kept pace with increasing use of modern technologies, it is more pertinent to examine how it varies across different agro-climatic zones/districts and what has been the trend in its growth over a period of time.
VII.7 Crop intensity for Bihar was 136.1% in 1990-91. Over the years, it showed a marginal improvement in crop intensity from 129.0% in 1971-72 to 135.2% in 1981-82 and 136.1% in 1990-91. Compared to the all-India average of 130.4%, Bihar presents a better picture in crop intensity. However, in comparison to cropping intensity in states like Punjab (177.7%) and Haryana (165.4%), it is much less in Bihar. States such as West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, and Orissa were also ahead of Bihar with crop intensity at 162.5%, 147.3%, and 152.2% respectively. All these states gained in crop intensity in the range of 27.5% as in Orissa to 10.8% as in Uttar Pradesh, whereas in Bihar it improved by 5.5% only over the same period.
VII.8 Across different agro-climatic zones/districts, the plateau districts showed relatively low crop intensity at 109% only. Among the alluvial plains, it was relatively high in the north-west zone (149%), followed by the east zone (143%). The south-west zone showed crop intensity at 140%. Analyzing crop intensity across different districts, it is observed that districts such as Darbhanga, Gopalganj, and Siwan in the north-west plains showed high crop intensity at 171%, 184%, and 165% respectively. Districts such as Muzaffarpur, Saran, and Vaishali had moderately high crop intensity ranging between 150% and 155%. It was, however, much less in Madhubani (134%) and East Champaran (128%).
VII.9 Among the districts of the east alluvial plains, only Begusarai, Katihar, and Saharsa showed relatively high crop intensity at 155%, 161%, and 154% respectively. Bhagalpur and Munger, on the contrary, showed relatively low crop intensity at 122% and 123% respectively. Among the districts of the south-west alluvial plains, Rohtas alone showed crop intensity (150%) comparable to districts in the north-west and east alluvial plains. In other districts, it was modest in the range of 137% as in Patna and 144% as in Nalanda. Crop intensity among the districts of the plateau zone was dismally low in the range of 114% as in Hazaribagh and 103% as in Singhbhum.
d) Area Sown More Than Once
VII.10 Area sown more than once showed an increasing trend in most of the agro-climatic zones. It was increasing at 0.42% per annum in the north-west alluvial plains, 0.38% per annum in the east alluvial plains, and 1.09% per annum in the south-west alluvial plains. The plateau districts, on the contrary, showed a declining trend at (-)1.49% per annum. Amidst the general scenario of expanding area sown more than once, most of the districts in the north-west alluvial plains showed a declining trend. Such districts included Madhubani, Samastipur, Saran, Sitamarhi, Vaishali, and West Champaran. The rate of decline was as high as (-)1.90% in West Champaran and as low as (-)0.06% in Samastipur. Districts showing expansion in area sown more than once included Muzaffarpur, Gopalganj, and Siwan at 2.59%, 2.77%, and 1.50% respectively. In the east alluvial plains, only Munger and Purnea showed a declining trend at (-)5.08% and (-)0.36% respectively. In all other districts, it showed expansion in the range of 4.12% per annum as in Begusarai and 0.44% as in Bhagalpur. Districts of the south-west alluvial plains, on the contrary, showed uniformity in the expansion of area sown more than once, increasing in the range of 1.89% as in Nalanda and 1.29% as in Gaya. The scenario among the districts of the plateau zone was different with some of the districts showing a high rate of decline. The rate of decline was as high as (-)9.22% in Santhal Parganas and (-)2.03% in Dhanbad. Districts such as Singhbhum, Hazaribagh, Palamu, and Ranchi, however, showed an increasing trend in area sown more than once at 6.21%, 1.90%, and 1.61% respectively.
e) Gross Cropped Area
VII.12 In the context of expanding area sown more than once, gross cropped area showed shrinkage in most of the agro-climatic zones and districts. All the zones of the north-west alluvial plains, south-west alluvial plains, east alluvial plains, and plateau districts showed a declining trend in gross cropped area at (-)0.62%, (-)0.45%, (-)0.15%, and (-)2.31% respectively. The declining trend was far and wide among the districts of the north-west, in the range of (-)1.83% as in Sitamarhi and (-)0.03% as in Siwan. Amidst such a scenario, Gopalganj and Muzaffarpur showed expansion in gross cropped area at 0.51% and 1.65% respectively.
VII.13 Shrinkage in gross cropped area was more widespread among the districts of the east alluvial plains with Munger showing a high rate of decline at (-)3.99% per annum. Bhagalpur, on the other hand, showed minimal shrinkage in gross cropped area at (-)0.09% per annum. Begusarai and Saharsa showed expansion in gross cropped area at 3.50% and 0.49% per annum respectively. Districts of the south-west alluvial plains also showed a decline in gross cropped area, although at modest rates ranging between (-)0.74% as in Aurangabad and 0.16% as in Patna. Nalanda was the lone district in this zone to show expansion in gross cropped area at 0.11% per annum. In contrast to the districts of the south-west alluvial plains, the districts of the plateau region showed a declining trend uniformly with the only exception of Dhanbad. It ranged between (-)5.53% as in Ranchi and (-)0.48% as in Hazaribagh.
f) Crop Intensity
VII.14 Examining the trend rates of growth in crop intensity across different agro-climatic zones, it showed an increasing trend in the north-west alluvial plains, east alluvial plains, and south-west alluvial plains at 0.28%, 0.71%, and 0.29% respectively. It may be taken to imply that in all these zones the land is being increasingly used more intensively for cultivation purposes. However, the zone of the plateau showed a declining trend at (-)1.02% per annum, implying thereby that intensive use of land is on the wane in this zone.
VII.15 Crop intensity across different districts showed an increasing trend uniformly among the districts of the north-west alluvial plains. The rate of increase was as high as 1.50% in Muzaffarpur and as low as 0.08% in Saran. Amidst such a pattern, however, Madhubani and West Champaran showed a declining trend in crop intensity at (-)0.05% and (-)0.56% respectively. The pattern across the districts in the east alluvial plains was almost similar with most of the districts showing an increasing trend in crop intensity ranging between 0.93% as in Katihar and 0.06% as in Purnea. Munger was the only district in this zone to show a declining trend in crop intensity at (-)0.69% per annum. The pattern among the districts of the south-west alluvial plains was no different, as most of the districts showed an increasing trend of crop intensity in the range of 0.63% as in Aurangabad and 0.05% as in Patna. Districts of the plateau region, however, presented a picture in contrast with most of the districts showing a declining trend. The rate of decline ranged between (-)0.61% as in Santhal Parganas and (-)0.05% as in Hazaribagh. In contrast, Ranchi and Singhbhum showed an increasing trend in crop intensity at 3.80% and 0.09% respectively.
Conclusions
VII.16 The following broad conclusions thus emerge on the basis of the foregoing discussions with regard to the trend and pattern of growth in the land use in Bihar:
(i) Availability of land for cultivation was relatively low in Bihar. In a few districts, particularly the plateau districts, it was disproportionately low. Presence of high current fallow and other waste land suggests potential for bringing additional areas for cultivation in the state. The problem warrants immediate action in the context of net sown area showing a declining trend. It was precipitated largely due to an increase in other waste land and current fallow on the one hand and shift of land to miscellaneous trees as also for non-agricultural use on the other.
(ii) Shrinkage in net sown area was uniform across all agro-climatic zones. However, the rate of shrinkage was more prominent and sharp in the plateau zone, followed by the east alluvial plains and the north-west alluvial plains. The south-west alluvial plains showed relatively low shrinkage.
(iii) Area sown more than once showed an increasing trend in all the agro-climatic zones in the plain land, but declined in the plateau region. This implied that in the context of declining net sown area, the tendency to make more intensive use of land for cultivation was on the increase. But, much of the gains on this account were lost in view of the decline in net sown area, resulting in a trend of declining gross cropped area uniformly across all the agro-climatic zones.

CHAPTER VIII
GROWTH IN FERTILIZER CONSUMPTION - TEMPORAL AND SPATIAL PATTERN
Discussions in the preceding chapters brought out the fact that Bihar agriculture is on the growth path with production of foodgrains as also major non-foodgrain crops like oilseeds and sugarcane showing an upswing, especially since the mid-eighties. However, despite acceleration in agricultural production in the state, it is yet to catch momentum, given the richness of soil and climate. In lines similar to other agriculturally developed states like Punjab, Haryana, etc., with similar area under rice as in Bihar, states like West Bengal and Uttar Pradesh produced almost double of its rice output. Similarly, with half the area under wheat as in Bihar, Haryana produced almost similar levels of wheat. The case of sugarcane and oilseeds and a few other crops is no better. Such wide differentials in the production of agricultural crops in Bihar with those of other major states emanated largely because of wide differentials in the yield levels. Within the State, a wide variation was observed in the yield level across different agro-climatic zones and districts.
a) Consumption of Fertilizer
VIII.3 Studies have found adequate evidence to suggest a significant influence of chemical fertilizer on yield and output level of crops, depending upon irrigated and unirrigated conditions as well as the nature of crop under cultivation. Mention may be made of studies such as Desai (1982), Mukhopadhyaya (1976), Nagraj (1980), NCAER (1978), Parikh and Trivedi (1982), etc. Increase in fertilizer consumption, however, did not match the pace of increase in foodgrains production. The growth in output is not commensurate with the increased fertilizer use as also observed at the all-India level, as reflected in the study by Parikh and Srinivasan (1974). Significantly, agriculture of Bihar has been responsive to increased use of chemical fertilizers and its resultant impact on enhanced crop yield. Fertilizer consumption in Bihar was a mere 9.06 kg/ha. in 1970-71 which increased to 21.01 kg/ha. in 1982-83 and to a high of 57.20 kg/ha. in 1992-93, recording a compound annual growth rate of 8.73% during 1971-93. Despite such an impressive jump in the use of chemical fertilizers, the State was not nearer to the level of fertilizer consumption in states like Punjab (162.2 kg/ha.), Haryana (107.8 kg/ha.), Uttar Pradesh (86.0 kg/ha.), Tamil Nadu (117.1 kg/ha.), as also the all-India average (67.1 kg/ha.) in 1992-93.
Regional Analysis
VIII.4 Fertilizer consumption was increasing in different agro-climatic zones/districts as well. However, there was wide variation in the level of its use across different zones/districts. It was as high as 87.36 kg/ha. in the south-west plains, followed by 55.04 kg/ha. in the north-west and 50.11 kg/ha. in the east plains during 1990-91. On the other hand, it was much less at 25.66 kg/ha. in the plateau zone. Across different districts, the fertilizer consumption was as high as 135.86 kg/ha. in Nalanda and 103.62 kg/ha. in Begusarai. The levels of fertilizer consumption in these districts were almost similar to that of Punjab, Haryana, and other agriculturally developed states. Among the districts of the north-west plains, the fertilizer consumption was relatively high in Saran (81.80 kg/ha.), Muzaffarpur (79.35 kg/ha.), Vaishali (73.43 kg/ha.), and Samastipur (68.92 kg/ha.). On the other hand, districts such as Madhubani (18.85 kg/ha.) and Darbhanga (33.93 kg/ha.) showed relatively low consumption of fertilizers.
VIII.5 The districts in the east plains did not present an encouraging picture in the use of fertilizers. Among these districts, however, Purnea (59.68 kg/ha.) and Katihar (59.74 kg/ha.) showed relatively high levels of fertilizer consumption. Bhagalpur (30.66 kg/ha.) and Saharsa (34.25 kg/ha.) lagged far behind. Increase in the consumption of fertilizer was relatively more in Purnea and Katihar, growing annually at 20.96% and 23.87% respectively during 1977-91. Bhagalpur and Munger, on the other hand, showed stagnation in the consumption of fertilizer, especially during the second sub-period.
VIII.6 Fertilizer consumption in the districts of the plateau zone was less than 25 kg/ha. Dhanbad (4.86 kg/ha.) and Palamu (10.24 kg/ha.) showed the least consumption of fertilizers. With the exception of Dhanbad, the districts of this zone, however, showed an increasing trend in its consumption during 1977-91.
Composition of Fertilizer Consumption
VIII.7 The composition of chemical fertilizer is important, as it adversely affects soil fertility if used disproportionately. It is important, therefore, to use fertilizers in required doses as well as in optimum composition. In Bihar, fertilizer was used largely for paddy and wheat. Comparing the recommended dose of chemical fertilizer for these crops with that of the actual consumption, it is observed that the use of fertilizer nutrients was not balanced in the state. As against the recommended share of 56.0% for nitrogen, it was 74.0% in 1970-71. Although, over the years, the share of nitrogen declined from 80.0% in 1975-76 to 67.5% in 1992-93, still it remained excess to the recommended level. The consumption of phosphorus, on the other hand, was deficient despite its increasing share over the years from 16.0% in 1970-71 to 22.5% in 1992-93 as against the recommended composition of 30%. The use of potash as well was deficient and remained at around 10.0% only as against the recommended composition of 14%. Thus, while nitrogen was over-used, the use of potash and phosphorus was deficient in the state.

VIII. Fertilizer Consumption and Composition in Bihar
VIII.1 Fertilizer Consumption Across Agro-Climatic Zones
The level of fertilizer consumption varied significantly across different agro-climatic zones in Bihar. The consumption was as high as 87.36 kg/ha in the south-west plains, followed by 55.04 kg/ha in the north-west and 50.11 kg/ha in the east plains during 1990-91. In contrast, the plateau zone had much lower consumption at 25.66 kg/ha.
Among districts, fertilizer consumption peaked at 135.86 kg/ha in Nalanda and 103.62 kg/ha in Begusarai, comparable to levels in Punjab, Haryana, and other agriculturally developed states. Districts such as Saran (81.80 kg/ha), Muzaffarpur (79.35 kg/ha), Vaishali (73.43 kg/ha), and Samastipur (68.92 kg/ha) in the north-west plains showed relatively high consumption. Conversely, Madhubani (18.85 kg/ha) and Darbhanga (33.93 kg/ha) had lower consumption.
VIII.2 Composition of Fertilizer Consumption
VIII.2.1 Imbalance in Nutrient Composition
The composition of chemical fertilizer is crucial as disproportionate use can adversely affect soil fertility. In Bihar, fertilizers were predominantly used for paddy and wheat. Comparing actual consumption with recommended doses revealed an imbalance. In 1970-71, nitrogen constituted 74.0% of fertilizer use against a recommended 56.0%. Though the share of nitrogen declined to 67.5% by 1992-93, it remained above the recommended level. Conversely, phosphorus consumption was deficient, increasing from 16.0% in 1970-71 to 22.5% in 1992-93, below the recommended 30%. Potash consumption was also deficient, remaining at around 10.0% compared to the recommended 14%.
VIII.2.2 Regional Imbalances
North-west Plains
Nitrogen consumption was excessive, exceeding 60% in most districts, though a few districts like Saran, East and West Champaran showed balanced consumption. Nitrogen consumption in Muzaffarpur, for example, decreased from 85.00% in 1976-77 to 65.37% in 1990-91.
Phosphorus consumption was generally deficient, with shares less than the recommended 30%. Balanced phosphorus consumption was observed in West Champaran, Saran, and East Champaran. Potash consumption remained deficient, with East Champaran and Samastipur approaching balanced levels.
East Plains
Nitrogen consumption was relatively balanced, though high in Munger and Bhagalpur at around 70.0%. Declining trends were noted in Begusarai and Purnea. Phosphorus consumption was deficient in Munger with a share of 19.66%, but increased in other districts. Potash consumption was favorable, except in Bhagalpur and Munger.
South-west Plains
Nitrogen consumption was high, with Rohtas being the only district showing balanced levels at around 60.0%. Phosphorus consumption was deficient, with shares around 20% in most districts, though it increased from less than 10.0% in 1976-77 to around 20.0% in 1990-91. Potash consumption was also deficient, with increases observed over the years.
Plateau Zone
Nitrogen consumption exceeded 65.0% in most districts but showed a declining trend. Phosphorus consumption was close to the recommended dose, with increasing trends noted. Potash consumption was below 12.0% in all districts, with some districts showing further deterioration.
VIII.3 Measure of Fertilizer Nutrient Imbalance
The index of nutrient ratio revealed significant imbalances in nutrient use, with the ratios of N/P and N/K much higher than the recommended base, indicating a deficiency in phosphorus and potash relative to nitrogen.
North-west Plains
Imbalances in nutrient use were substantial, particularly in Sitamarhi and East Champaran. Samastipur and Gopalganj showed relatively fewer imbalances.
East Plains
Munger and Bhagalpur had significant imbalances, while Saharsa and Katihar showed lesser deviations.
South-west Plains
All districts exhibited high imbalances in nutrient ratios, particularly Patna, with ratios exceeding 250.0%.
Plateau Zone
Imbalances were less severe compared to other zones, with lower deviations in districts like Singhbhum and Ranchi.
VIII.4 Impact of Imbalance in Nutrient Use on Yield Levels
The unbalanced use of nutrients negatively impacted the yield levels of foodgrains, with elasticities of -0.35 for N/P and -0.42 for N/K, indicating adverse effects on yield.
VIII.5 Relationship Between Fertilizer Consumption, Foodgrains Production, Irrigation, and Rainfall
VIII.5.1 Fertilizer Consumption and Yield
Positive elasticity of 0.23 was observed for the state. An increase in fertilizer consumption by 0.57 kg led to a 2.40 kg increase in foodgrains yield.
VIII.5.2 Irrigation
The influence of irrigation on fertilizer consumption was significant, with elasticity of 6.14% at the state level and higher in specific zones like the south-west plains.
VIII.6 Conclusions
VIII.6.1 Overall Consumption Trends
Fertilizer consumption increased significantly from 21.01 kg/ha in 1982-83 to 57.20 kg/ha in 1992-93 but remained below levels in Punjab, Haryana, and the all-India average.
VIII.6.2 Regional Consumption
Higher consumption was observed in regions with extensive irrigation networks. Districts like Patna and Begusarai showed levels comparable to more prosperous states.
VIII.6.3 Nutrient Imbalance
Fertilizer use was disproportionate, with excess nitrogen and deficient phosphorus and potash. Imbalances had a negative impact on foodgrain yields.
VIII.6.4 Influence of Fertilizer and Irrigation
Fertilizer consumption positively impacted yield, and irrigation significantly influenced fertilizer use across different zones and districts.

CHAPTER IX
GROWTH IN IRRIGATION - TEMPORAL AND SPATIAL ANALYSIS
The expansion and improvement in the irrigation network occupy a central role in agricultural development strategy, as it augments land productivity on the one hand and brings stability in agricultural output on the other. Bihar has been endowed with vast irrigation potential. The ultimate irrigation potential for the State is estimated at 6.50 million hectare metres for major/medium irrigation. However, the potential created was only 43.0% in respect of major/medium irrigation by 1990-91. The case of minor irrigation was no better. According to the Ground Water Irrigation Commission, the State has 2.67 million hectare metres of groundwater as utilizable for irrigation. As against this, the net draft, i.e., level of groundwater development, was only 25.46% in the State. This leaves enough scope for expansion of minor irrigation potentials in the State. In this context, several policy questions arise:
How has the irrigation expanded across different agro-climatic zones/districts over these years?
What has been the efficiency of irrigation?
To what extent has it facilitated increased use of bio-chemical technology?
How has it influenced the yield and hence agricultural output in different regions?
Why is irrigation not expanding despite vast potentials?
What are the major constraints for investments in irrigation in the State?
The following paragraphs address these questions on the basis of data on irrigation as available from secondary sources.
(i) Expansion of Irrigation
IX.2 The net irrigated area in the state increased only marginally from 28.74 lakh ha. in 1976-77 to 33.05 lakh ha. in 1990-91, an expansion of 11.50% only in 15 years. The net irrigated area formed only 42.85% of net sown area in 1990-91, as against 93.5% in Punjab, 76.05% in Haryana, and 60.92% in Uttar Pradesh.
IX.3 Of the several sources of irrigation, tubewell (42.0%) was followed by canal (33.0%) which dominated the irrigation network in the State. Irrigation through wells and ponds formed an insignificant proportion. Analysis of the growth in different sources of irrigation suggests that while tubewell showed expansion (2.37% p.a.), all other sources, including canal, showed shrinkage with their share in total irrigation showing a declining trend.
IX.4 Analyzing the availability as well as expansion of irrigation across different agro-climatic zones, it was observed that the south-west plains were highly irrigated (81.14%), quite comparable to the States of Punjab and Haryana. Districts of this zone, except Patna, showed relatively high irrigation levels, exceeding 80.0%. Patna had an irrigated area at 60.94% only. Net irrigated area showed an increasing trend (0.66%) during 1977-91 in this zone. The rate of increase was high in Rohtas (2.32%). Patna, Nawadah, and Gaya, on the other hand, showed a declining trend in net irrigated area.
IX.5 The level of irrigation was almost similar in the north-west and east plains at 45.19% and 41.73%, respectively, in 1990-91. Among the districts of these zones, Begusarai (70.55%), followed by Siwan (70.37%) and Saran (68.68%) had relatively high levels of irrigation. However, districts such as Purnea (23.87%) and Katihar (29.54%) of the east plains; and Madhubani (21.15%) and Sitamarhi (23.69%) in the north-west plains had the least coverage of irrigation. In terms of growth in the irrigated area, districts such as Purnea (6.02%), Katihar (6.69%), Vaishali (5.75%), and Darbhanga (5.96%) showed impressive performance.
IX.6 The plateau districts, on the contrary, showed low irrigated area at 7.19% only in 1990-91. Of the districts falling under this zone, Palamu showed a relatively high level of irrigation (21.75%). In all other districts, it was less than 10.07% of the net sown area. The level of irrigation showed shrinkage in all the districts ranging between (-)12.15% as in Dhanbad and (-)0.77% as in Ranchi during 1977-91.
Canal
IX.7 Canal irrigation showed an increasing trend only in respect of the east plains (2.12%) and the south-west plains (1.35%). The rate of increase in canal irrigation was impressive, especially in Aurangabad (4.52%), Saharsa (3.05%), Munger (2.89%), and Bhagalpur (2.08%). All these districts showed relatively high levels of irrigation from the canal. There were a few other districts as well with high canal irrigation networks, but showing shrinkage therein. They included East Champaran (-1.13%), Gopalganj (-3.71%), and West Champaran (-4.86%). Districts of the plateau zone also showed a decline in canal irrigation, prominently in Santhal Parganas (-9.35%). By implication, there was a decline of 1.04 lakh hectares in canal irrigation in the State over these years, which formed 9.50% of canal irrigation in 1990-91. This means, irrigation potentials on these lands were created, but irrigation could not be provided because of choking of canals or absence of proper distribution or land falling at the tail-end unable to receive irrigation. Improvement in terms of desiltation of canals, repair of bunds, and creation of additional distributories may enable irrigation on these lands as well.
IX.8 Tubewell irrigation, the other major source of irrigation, showed expansion in respect of the north-west (3.10%), the east (3.52%), and the south-west plains (0.98%). The plateau districts, on the other hand, showed shrinkage (-0.13%) in tubewell irrigation. The districts showing impressive expansion in tubewell irrigation included Darbhanga (4.35%), Madhubani (4.59%), Vaishali (5.28%), and West Champaran (6.35%) in the north-west plains; Begusarai (6.33%) and Purnea (6.95%) in the east plains; Nawadah (3.73%) in the south-west plains; and Hazaribagh (8.61%) in the plateau. Districts such as Muzaffarpur, Munger, Aurangabad, and Rohtas, where tubewell irrigation was prominent, however, showed shrinkage in tubewell irrigation. The aggregate decline in tubewell irrigation area in the State came to 0.49 lakh hectares. The major reason for the decline in tubewell irrigation could be attributed to non-functioning of the state-owned deep tubewells. Besides, some of the private investment in shallow tubewells have become unviable.
IX.9 Irrigation through other wells was not a major source at the aggregate level. However, in some of the districts, especially in the plateau zone, it was an important source with a larger share in total irrigation. Such districts included Gopalganj, Saran, and Siwan in the north-west; Bhagalpur and Munger in the east; Gaya and Nalanda in the south-west; and Santhal Parganas, Giridih, Hazaribagh, Palamu, and Ranchi in the plateau zone. In all these districts, except Bhagalpur, irrigation through other wells showed a decline. The rate of decline was significantly high in respect of Saran, Siwan, Nalanda, and Nawadah. Aggregate decline in irrigation through other wells in 1990-91 over 1976-77 worked out to 1.62 lakh hectares, which formed 124.53% of the irrigation through other wells in 1990-91. Irrigation potential through other wells created once, but were lying unutilized for reasons of energisation, incomplete channel work, etc.
IX.10 Irrigation through ponds/tanks, though in small magnitude, is uniformly spread in different agro-climatic zones of the State and showed almost stagnant area under their irrigation at the state level. Across different districts, however, while it showed impressive increases in respect of districts such as Darbhanga, Madhubani, West Champaran, Munger, Gaya, Nalanda, and Hazaribagh, a few other districts registered sharp declines in area under pond/tank irrigation. They included Samastipur, Siwan, Santhal Parganas, Giridih, and Palamu. Aggregate decline in irrigation through ponds/tanks worked out to 0.38 lakh hectares, which formed 33.10% of ponds/tanks irrigated area in 1990-91 in the state.
(ii) Irrigation Intensity
IX.11 Irrigation intensity, measured as the ratio of gross irrigated area to net irrigated area, provides one measure to examine the extent of irrigation utilization. Analysis of the data suggests that it was quite low at 124.0% for the State in 1991-92 as against 180.0% in Punjab, 163.0% in Haryana, and 148.0% in Uttar Pradesh. A district-wise analysis shows that while the south-west plains had higher irrigation intensity at 158.14%, the east plains had relatively lower intensity at 119.62% and the plateau districts had the least irrigation intensity at 79.94%. The irrigation intensity showed an increasing trend in the south-west plains (0.66% p.a.), while it was declining in all other agro-climatic zones.
(iii) The Role of Irrigation in Yield and Productivity
IX.12 The role of irrigation in raising the level of yield is crucial. The period of study showed the yield rate in the state in respect of major crops such as paddy, wheat, and sugarcane to be far lower than that of Punjab and Haryana, but higher than that of Uttar Pradesh. The average productivity of paddy in Bihar was 13.5 quintals per hectare in 1992-93, compared to 29.9 quintals in Punjab, 26.8 quintals in Haryana, and 16.6 quintals in Uttar Pradesh. Similarly, the average yield of wheat was 11.0 quintals per hectare in Bihar compared to 27.4 quintals in Punjab, 22.4 quintals in Haryana, and 16.6 quintals in Uttar Pradesh. In the case of sugarcane, Bihar had an average yield of 67.6 quintals per hectare compared to 108.4 quintals in Uttar Pradesh and 110.6 quintals in Punjab. The significant low yield rates in Bihar could be attributed to low irrigation levels in the State, besides inadequate use of bio-chemical technology.
IX.13 Though irrigation plays a significant role in raising productivity, the yield rate for the major crops showed an increasing trend over the period in all the agro-climatic zones. The highest rate of increase was observed in the east plains zone in respect of wheat (0.85%), and sugarcane (1.21%) yield. The south-west plains showed an increasing trend in productivity for paddy (1.14%) and sugarcane (0.90%) crops. The north-west plains showed an increasing trend in the yield rate of paddy (1.14%) and wheat (0.85%). The plateau zone, however, showed decreasing productivity rates for paddy (-0.17%) and wheat (-0.27%) crops.
(iv) Constraints in the Expansion of Irrigation
IX.14 The expansion of irrigation in the State has been constrained by several factors. Some of the prominent ones include:
Inefficiency in Existing Infrastructure: Inefficiencies in canal management, such as choking of canals and inadequate maintenance, have been significant constraints.
Inadequate Investment: Limited investment in irrigation infrastructure, particularly in minor irrigation schemes, has curtailed expansion.
Technical and Operational Constraints: Problems related to technical and operational aspects of tubewell irrigation, such as non-functioning of state-owned deep tubewells and unviable private investments in shallow tubewells.
Geographical and Climatic Factors: Certain geographical areas, particularly the plateau regions, have inherent limitations that affect irrigation.
IX.15 Addressing these constraints requires a comprehensive approach including improved infrastructure maintenance, increased investment in irrigation, and adopting better technological solutions for water management. Efforts to enhance the efficiency of existing irrigation networks, along with expanding the coverage of minor irrigation schemes, are essential for achieving optimal irrigation levels and improving agricultural productivity in the State.

IX. Irrigation and Crop Production in Bihar
IX.21 Crop Intensity and Irrigation
Relatively low levels of agricultural output in Bihar are attributed, among other factors, to low crop intensity. Crop intensity is largely influenced by the irrigation network. Given the inelastic supply of land, the objective of output maximization could be achieved either by increased use of land-augmenting inputs and/or by utilizing the same piece of land for a greater number of times, subject to resource and technology constraints. Therefore, one might expect that expanding irrigation could increase crop intensity in the state.
Relating net and gross irrigated areas with crop intensity at both the state and district levels, using a log-linear function on data from 1976-77 to 1990-91, the elasticity of crop intensity with respect to net irrigated area was observed to be 0.10 with R2R^2R2 at 0.49. The elasticity of crop intensity with gross irrigated area for the state was observed to be 0.10 with R2R^2R2 at 0.28. Across different zones, the elasticity of crop intensity with net irrigated area was found to be significant only in the north-west and south-west plains. A similar pattern was observed across different districts, indicating a weak relationship between irrigation and crop intensity. This weak relationship might be due to the inefficient irrigation network and the low level of irrigated area.
IX.22 Irrigation and Crop Diversification
Creating irrigation potential involves both private and public investment. Naturally, a farmer would not only make optimal use of irrigation but also use it for crops that maximize farm income. With higher relative prices for cash crops, farmers are prompted to allocate more land to these crops while minimizing the area for food grain crops to ensure food security. With non-food grain crop areas at a minimum of around 7.0% in Bihar, there seems to be scope for further expanding cash crops. Creation of additional irrigation potential, coupled with adequate prices, may encourage the cultivation of more cash crops in the state.
Considering the increase in the percentage area under non-food grain crops as a proxy for crop diversification towards commercialization, and relating it to the percentage of gross irrigated area, there is a significant negative relationship between the two with elasticity at -0.44 at the state level. Similar relationships are observed in most districts, with very few districts showing a positive relationship, mostly with low elasticities. At first glance, one might conclude that irrigation influences crop diversification negatively, contrary to expectations. It should be noted that cash crop cultivation is region-specific. For instance, jute is grown in Purnea, Katihar, and Saharsa in the east plains; tobacco and chillies in Vaishali, Muzaffarpur, Samastipur, and Begusarai in the north-west; sugarcane in Gopalganj, West Champaran, and East Champaran in the north-west; and fruits and vegetables in Vaishali, Muzaffarpur in the north-west, and Purnea and Katihar in the east plains. Instability in the production of cash crops, suggested by high fluctuations in their area, is due to several factors including inadequate prices. The case of sugarcane is particularly noteworthy. More than 80.0% of sugarcane is sold to sugar mills at the lowest prices in the country. With high cultivation costs, mainly due to irrigation through diesel pump sets and relatively low prices for the product, the economics of sugarcane cultivation becomes unfavorable in the state. Additionally, payment delays by sugar mills, sometimes extending up to three years, provide further disincentives. Transportation issues and long waiting times further dampen farmers' enthusiasm. The situations with tobacco, jute, chillies, fruits, and vegetables also require detailed study.
IX.23 Summary of Irrigation Trends
Despite vast potential, the availability of irrigation was low in Bihar at 42.85% of the net sown area in 1990-91, compared to 93.52% in Punjab, 76.05% in Haryana, and 60.92% in Uttar Pradesh. The potential created was only 43.07% for major/medium irrigation and 25.46% for groundwater.
The increase in net irrigated area from 28.78 lakh ha. in 1976-77 to 33.05 lakh ha. in 1990-91 was not substantial, showing an increase of only 11.50% over 15 years.
The dominant source of irrigation was tubewells (42.0%), followed by canals (33.0%). Tubewell irrigation alone showed expansion, while all other sources, including canal irrigation, recorded a decline.
Across different agro-climatic zones, the south-west plains (81.14%) were relatively more irrigated, comparable with more prosperous states. The north-west and east plains lagged far behind with net irrigated areas around 45.05%. The plateau zone had a negligible 7.19% irrigated area. The south-west plains showed growth in irrigated area, while all other zones displayed a declining trend.
Analysis of growth by different sources of irrigation indicated that canal irrigation was increasing only in the east and south-west plains. Prominent districts showing increased canal irrigation included Aurangabad, Saharsa, Munger, and Bhagalpur. Conversely, districts like East Champaran, West Champaran, and Gopalganj showed a decline in canal irrigation. The aggregate decline in canal irrigation was 1.04 lakh hectares over 1977-91, forming 9.53% of canal irrigation in 1990-91.
Tubewell irrigation, prominent in the north-west plains, showed an increasing trend in all zones except the plateau. Districts with notable increases in tubewell irrigation included Dharbhanga, Madhubani, Vaishali, West Champaran, Begusarai, Purnea, and Nawadah. The aggregate decline in tubewell irrigation worked out to 0.49 lakh ha., which formed 3.53% of tubewell irrigation in 1990-91.
Irrigation through other wells was prominent in the plateau region and showed a declining trend. The aggregate decline was 1.62 lakh ha., forming 124.5% of its irrigated area in 1990-91. Irrigation through ponds/tanks also declined, with an aggregate decline of 0.38 lakh ha. in 1990-91.
Irrigation intensity was low at 124.0% in Bihar compared to 180.0% in Punjab, 163.0% in Haryana, and 131.0% at the all-India level. Across different zones, it did not vary widely. However, the south-west plains had relatively high irrigation intensity at 134.0%. Among districts, it was relatively high in Gopalganj (190%), Katihar (178%), and Rohtas (157%).
Irrigation was primarily used for foodgrain crops, with their share at 93.07% of total irrigation. Among these, cereals (92.89%) occupied a significant share in irrigation, with crops such as paddy, wheat, and maize having the largest share.
Analysis of irrigated area for major crops suggests that wheat had the highest irrigation coverage at 85.52% in 1990-91. For paddy and maize, coverage was lower at 35.43% and 43.15% respectively. Among non-food grains, tobacco had higher irrigation coverage at 60.76% in 1990-91.
Irrigation was observed to significantly influence fertilizer consumption and crop intensity in the state.
Irrigation was also observed to influence crop diversification. However, the relationship between irrigation and the area under non-food crops was negative.
Chapter X: Expansion in the Use of HYV Seeds – Temporal and Spatial Analysis
Studies have shown that approximately 45.0% of the increase in crop output is attributable to pure yield increase. Given the soil-moisture environment, bio-chemical technology has been crucial in determining crop yield per unit area. HYV seeds are a major component of bio-chemical technology. Field data show that HYVs can absorb a larger quantity of nutrients and yield more per unit of nutrient than traditional varieties. Irrigation and fertilizer alone cannot fully impact yield increase unless accompanied by the use of HYVs. To maximize output, there needs to be a spread of HYV seeds over a larger number of crops and greater crop areas. Under the plan effort, HYV seeds have expanded in coverage, though to varying degrees across different states. While the use of HYV seeds became widespread in Punjab and Haryana, the eastern states have lagged behind. Moreover, HYV technology was available only for a few crops and mainly under irrigated conditions.
X.2 Spread and Impact of HYV Seeds
As discussed in Chapter III, foodgrain production in Bihar has shown impressive performance. While irrigation has remained stagnant, fertilizer use has significantly increased. This chapter examines whether the use of HYV seeds has similarly increased in Bihar, how different zones/districts have responded, and how the use of HYV seeds has influenced the use of related inputs and crop output in Bihar. The analysis uses time series data on HYV seed area for major crops like paddy, maize, and wheat, for which HYV technology is more widely used in the state. Data was obtained from the Directorate of Economics and Statistics, Government of Bihar, covering the years 1979-80 to 1990-91.
X.3 Paddy
Analysis suggests an increasing coverage of paddy HYV area in recent years in the state. It formed only 20.31% of paddy area in 1979-80, which increased to 33.86% in 1990-91. The coverage of HYV paddy area thus recorded an increase with a compound annual growth rate of 4.05% during this period. In terms of physical area, HYV seeds for paddy expanded from 10.36 lakh hectares in 1979-80 to 16.67 lakh hectares in 1990-91, showing an increase of 60.90% in eleven years. The compound annual growth rate in HYV area for paddy was 4.02% during this period. However, compared to other major states, coverage of HYV for paddy was much less in Bihar. While it was 94.17% in Punjab, 87.04% in Uttar Pradesh, 56.03% in West Bengal, 95.03% in Tamil Nadu, 90.04% in Andhra Pradesh, and 64.31% at the all-India level, for Bihar it was only 33.86% in 1990-91.
X.4 Regional and District Analysis
Across different zones/districts, the coverage of HYV area for paddy was highest in the south-west alluvial plains at 65.89%. Among the districts in this zone, Rohtas (86.64%) and Bhojpur (81.95%) had relatively high coverage of HYV. In contrast, districts like Gaya (41.32%) and Nawadah (35.95%) showed lower coverage. The rate of increase in physical HYV area and percentage coverage during 1980-91 was impressive in most districts, with the rate of increase per annum in physical area as high as 8.92% in Nalanda and 7.34% in Gaya.
Coverage of HYV seeds for paddy was relatively low in the north-west zones (25.72%) and the east plains (39.07%). In the plateau districts, it was almost negligible at 8.33%. The rate of expansion of HYV seeds was notable only in the eastern plains, with the north-west plains and plateau districts showing a slower pace of increase. Districts with relatively higher coverage of HYV seeds included Siwan (47.63%), Saran (41.52%), and West Champaran (37.73%) in the north-west plains; Purnea (77.41%) in the east plains; and Santhal Parganas (11.63%) in the plateau districts.


X. Expansion in the Use of HYV Seeds – Temporal and Spatial Analysis
X.5 Maize
X.5.1 Coverage and Growth Trends
Analysis of maize presents a contrasting picture with the HYV area showing a shrinkage from 3.99 lakh hectares in 1979-80 to 3.82 lakh hectares in 1990-91, recording a decline at (-)0.60% per annum during this period. Coverage of HYV maize area, however, was increasing from 48.12% in 1979-80 to 57.48% in 1990-91, recording a compound annual rate of growth of 1.94%. Despite the increasing share in percentage terms, the overall decline in maize area reduces the significance of this growth. Compared to other major maize-growing states, the coverage of HYV in Bihar was not encouraging. While it was as high as 75.47% in Andhra Pradesh, 100% in Maharashtra, 94.15% in Punjab, and 76.92% in West Bengal, Bihar had only 58.52% of maize area under HYV.
X.5.2 Regional and District Analysis
Cultivation of maize in Bihar is region-specific, primarily in the north-west and the east plains. Coverage of maize HYV was relatively high in these zones, more so in the north-west plains (75.38%). In zones with lower maize cultivation, spread of HYV was also low. The plateau districts showed a virtual absence of HYVs, with a spread of only 9.96%. Notably, HYV area for maize was shrinking in all zones except the east plains. The north-west plains, a major maize production area, saw a decline in HYV area at (-)1.85% per annum during 1980-91. The plateau districts experienced a high rate of decline at (-)4.47% per annum, while the south-west plains saw a decline at (-)4.25% per annum. The east plains, however, showed an increasing trend at 1.53% per annum.
X.5.3 District-Level Trends
Begusarai, Saharsa, Purnea, and Samastipur were major maize-producing districts. All these districts, except Samastipur, showed an increasing trend in maize HYV area. Begusarai, which produced almost one-third of the state's maize, recorded an impressive growth rate (6.99% per annum) in HYV area. Samastipur, however, showed a shrinkage in HYV area under maize at (-)1.14% per annum. Other major maize-growing districts, including East Champaran, Gopalganj, Muzaffarpur, and Saran, also showed a decline in HYV area.
X.6 Wheat
X.6.1 Coverage and Growth Trends
Coverage of HYV for wheat was relatively high, forming 74.50% of wheat area in 1990-91. However, its coverage has not increased significantly over the decade. While HYV wheat area formed 70.44% in 1979-80, it increased marginally to 74.50% in 1990-91, recording a compound annual rate of growth of 0.56%. In terms of physical area, the increase in HYV for wheat was more impressive, rising from 1.20 lakh hectares in 1979-80 to 1.46 lakh hectares in 1990-91, with a compound annual rate of growth of 2.51% during this period. The spread of HYV seeds for wheat was relatively low due to the neutralizing effect of the increasing wheat area itself. While area under wheat increased from 1.70 lakh hectares in 1979-80 to 1.96 lakh hectares in 1990-91 (an increase of 15.30%), the area under HYV seeds for wheat increased by 21.7% during the same period. Compared to other major states, the coverage of HYV for wheat in Bihar was low, with 96.33% in Punjab, 94.54% in Haryana, 93.40% in Uttar Pradesh, 100% in West Bengal, and 84.14% at the all-India level. Bihar's coverage was only 75.06%.
X.6.2 Regional and District Analysis
Coverage of HYV area under wheat was high in zones/districts with high wheat production. For instance, the north-west plains, with relatively high wheat production (40.93%), showed relatively high coverage of HYV (78.80%). The south-west plains, with wheat production (35.41%), also had relatively high HYV coverage (73.51%). The plateau districts, with minimal wheat production (2.05%), had the least HYV coverage (35.72%).
X.6.3 District-Level Trends
At the district level, similar patterns were observed. Districts such as Siwan, Saran, East Champaran, and Gopalganj in the north-west; Begusarai in the east; and Bhojpur and Rohtas in the south-west, with relatively high wheat production, showed high coverage of HYV in the range of 93.72% to 70.32%. Some districts showed high coverage of HYV despite being low wheat producers, such as Muzaffarpur (81.62%) and Samastipur (81.88%) in the north-west; Katihar (88.25%) and Saharsa (83.18%) in the east; and Dhanbad (92.42%) in the plateau zone.
X.6.4 Growth Trends by Region
Analysis of the increase in the physical area of wheat HYV shows expansion across all plain zones at a uniform rate during 1980-91. It increased at a compound annual rate of growth of 2.74% in the north-west, 2.72% in the south-west, and 2.57% in the east plains. Expansion in HYV wheat area was uniform across districts in these zones, regardless of wheat production levels. For example, Katihar and Darbhanga, with relatively low wheat production, showed impressive expansion in HYV area at over 3.0% per annum. Similarly, districts like Bhojpur, Begusarai, and Gopalganj, with high wheat production, also showed impressive expansion in HYV area at over 3.05% per annum.
X.6.5 Plateau Region Trends
The plateau region showed a contrasting picture with HYV area shrinking at (-)5.99% per annum during 1980-91. This decline was uniform across different districts in this zone, except Hazaribagh, which showed an increasing trend in HYV area at 1.05% per annum. The rate of decline in HYV area was as high as (-)21.50% per annum in Singhbhum and (-)16.52% in Dhanbad.
X.7 Relationship of HYV Area with Irrigation and Fertilizer
X.7.1 Irrigation
Baker and Herdt observed inadequacy of irrigation and water control as major constraints in the wider diffusion of rice HYV seeds. Ramasamy noted irrigation as an important determinant of HYV adoption for rice in Tamil Nadu. Examining the influence of irrigation on the adoption of HYV seeds for paddy, maize, and wheat in Bihar using a double log regression equation on district-wise time series data, it was found that irrigation positively influences the adoption of HYV area in Bihar. The elasticity of HYV on irrigation at the State level was 1.51 for paddy, 0.75 for wheat, and 0.23 for maize.
X.7.2 Regional Trends
Comparing the elasticity of irrigation on HYV area for paddy across different zones/districts with the trend rate of growth in HYV area and net and gross irrigated area, it is observed that zones/districts with higher net/gross irrigated areas had a higher trend rate of growth in HYV area and vice versa. For example, plateau districts showed a consistent decline in irrigation availability and a shrinkage in HYV area for wheat and paddy. In contrast, plain land districts showed increased irrigation availability and growth in HYV paddy and wheat area. The elasticity of irrigation on HYV coverage for paddy and maize was positive and significant in plateau districts as well, indicating that farmers chose to use available scarce irrigation resources for these crops.
X.7.3 Maize Trends
Maize presented a contrasting picture with its HYV area showing a declining trend even in zones/districts with increasing irrigation networks. Still, the elasticity of irrigation on HYV maize area was positive and significant in most districts, including those in the plateau zone. The sharp decline in maize HYV area across different zones/districts could be attributed to a general abandonment of maize cultivation. The positive elasticity of irrigation suggests that irrigation was used for maize cultivation primarily under HYV seeds.
X.7.4 Fertilizer
Fertilizer is essential for farmers to benefit from modern varieties of seeds, as modern varieties exhibit higher nutrient efficiency than traditional ones. In Bihar, there was a notable increase in fertilizer consumption, particularly after the mid-eighties. Analyzing the impact of HYVs on fertilizer consumption using time series data on fertilizer consumption and HYV area for paddy, wheat, and maize, and applying a double log regression equation, it was observed that with an increase in HYV area, fertilizer consumption also increased. The elasticity at the State level was 4.49. Across different zones/districts, plain alluvial land showed uniformly positive elasticities, while plateau districts exhibited negative elasticity, except for Hazaribagh. This suggests that districts with a sharp decline in irrigation also showed a decline in fertilizer consumption, particularly in the plateau zone where HYVs are not drought-resistant.

Conclusions
X.19 Broad Conclusions on HYV Seed Area Trends in Bihar
i) Coverage of HYV Area: Coverage of HYV area has been increasing for major crops such as paddy, wheat, and maize in the State. The pace of increase in HYV coverage was relatively more significant for paddy. Compared to agriculturally developed states, the coverage of HYV in Bihar was relatively low. For instance, it was much less for paddy at 33.86% in Bihar, compared to 94.17% in Punjab and 87.04% in Uttar Pradesh.
ii) Physical Area Trends: While maize HYV showed a declining trend in terms of physical area, paddy and wheat HYVs demonstrated an increasing trend.
iii) Regional Trends: Across different agro-climatic zones, the coverage of HYV showed an increasing trend in plain land zones. However, the plateau zone experienced a shrinkage in HYV coverage for all three major crops: paddy, wheat, and maize.
iv) Regional Specificity: Expansion in HYV area for paddy and wheat was region-specific to districts with high production of these crops.
v) Maize HYV Expansion: Despite a general declining trend in maize HYV area, districts such as Begusarai, Saharsa, and Purnea—having high maize production—showed an expansion in HYV area.
vi) Irrigation and Fertilizer Influence: Districts with relatively high irrigation networks showed higher HYV coverage. Crops with high irrigation also exhibited higher HYV coverage. There was a strong positive elasticity between fertilizer consumption and HYV coverage.
vii) Elasticity of HYV: Given the high yield augmentation effect of HYV, Bihar farmers did not wait for irrigation to use these seeds, as HYV area showed positive elasticity even in districts with low irrigation networks, particularly in the plateau zone.

CHAPTER XI
Flow of Institutional Credit
XI.1 Importance of Credit
Credit is crucial for achieving higher productivity and output of agricultural crops, particularly in resource-deficient regions with low investible surpluses. It facilitates the increased use of modern inputs at lower costs. To achieve enhanced flow of institutional credit, formal credit agencies expanded in Bihar, especially after the nationalization of banks. The branch network of scheduled commercial banks (CBs) in the state increased to 3,001, and Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) to 1,892 in 1993. Additionally, there were 34 District Central Co-operative Banks (DCCBs) with 494 branches and 6,967 Primary Agricultural Credit Societies (PACS) across the State in 1992. The Bihar State Land Development Bank (BSLDB) had 187 branches for financing investment credit in the State. This chapter examines and analyzes the flow of institutional credit in Bihar.
XI.2 Assessment of Credit Requirement in the State
i) Credit Requirements Estimates:
The Sen Committee (1982) estimated credit requirements—both short-term production credit and long-term investment credit—for Bihar agriculture at Rs. 1,505 crores for the VIIth Plan period and Rs. 1,870 crores for the VIIIth Plan period. Adjusted to current prices, this equated to Rs. 2,172 crores for the VIIth Plan and Rs. 4,039 crores for the VIIIth Plan period, translating to Rs. 434 crores per year for the VIIth Plan and Rs. 807 crores per year for the VIIIth Plan.
The Potential Linked Credit Plan (PLPs) of 1989-90 estimated the credit requirement for the rural and agricultural sector of the State at Rs. 601 crores for 1992-93.
The Task Force on Bihar estimated the credit requirement at Rs. 720 crores for 1993-94.
XI.3 Credit Flow in the State
i) Comparison with Estimates:
The actual flow of aggregate credit in the State during the VIIth Plan period was Rs. 1,068.7 crores in agriculture and allied sectors, which was only 49.2% of the estimated credit requirement. The initial years of the VIIth Plan saw even lower credit flows: Rs. 214.3 crores in 1991-92 and Rs. 195.7 crores in 1992-93. Compared to the Sen Committee estimates, actual credit flow was around one-fourth for the agriculture sector.
Estimates from PLPs and the Task Force covered a broader range, including small-scale industries and tertiary sectors. The actual credit flow compared to the PLP estimate was around 35.03% in 1991-92 and around 27.03% of the Task Force estimate in 1992-93.
ii) Trends in Credit Flow:
There was a downward trend in credit flows, particularly in agriculture and allied sectors. Credit flow increased from Rs. 298.5 crores in 1986 to Rs. 524.0 crores in 1988-89 but then decreased to Rs. 289.5 crores in 1992-93. Agriculture and allied sectors followed a similar trend with Rs. 152.0 crores in 1986, rising to Rs. 308.0 crores in 1988-89, and then declining to Rs. 195.7 crores in 1992-93.
iii) Share of Agriculture:
Agriculture and allied sectors continued to dominate in terms of share of total credit flow in the State, remaining around 50-58% up to 1990-91. From 1991-92 onwards, this share increased to 67.63% in 1992-93.
iv) Credit Flow per Hectare:
The flow of credit per gross cropped hectare in Bihar was Rs. 312, much lower than in other major states such as Rs. 5,961 in Kerala, Rs. 2,155 in Tamil Nadu, Rs. 1,189 in Punjab, and Rs. 1,101 in Andhra Pradesh. The all-India average was Rs. 708 per hectare. In Bihar, the share of PACS in total credit flow was 28.30%, compared to higher shares in Kerala (68.31%), Punjab (59.72%), and the all-India level (42.48%). The share of production credit was also disproportionately low in Bihar at 36.50% compared to higher percentages in other states.
XI.4 Regional Disparity in Credit Flow
i) Zone-wise Analysis:
Credit flow was highest in the agriculturally developed south-west plains (29.86%) and the north-west plains (24.79%). The plateau districts received relatively less credit (22.91%). High credit flow was observed in Ranchi (7.03%), Santhal Parganas (4.64%), and East Singhbhum (4.75%) of the plateau zone; Gaya (5.60%), Nalanda (5.22%), Patna (5.23%), and Rohtas (5.25%) of the south-west plains; Begusarai (5.79%) and Purnea (4.83%) of the east plains; and West Champaran (3.82%), East Champaran (3.02%), and Muzaffarpur (3.52%) of the north-west plains. Districts with relatively low credit flow included Hazaribagh (0.92%) and Giridih (1.19%) of the plateau zone; and Vaishali (1.21%), Madhubani (1.42%), and Gopalganj (1.33%) of the north-west plains.
ii) Credit Flow per Hectare:
The south-west plains had the highest credit flow per hectare (Rs. 340.2). The plateau districts showed a per hectare credit flow of Rs. 303.8, surpassing the north-west (Rs. 218.1) and east plains (Rs. 248.8). High credit flow per hectare was noted in Dhanbad (Rs. 921.0) of the plateau zone; Nalanda (Rs. 546.8) and Patna (Rs. 519.2) of the south-west plains; and Begusarai (Rs. 521.4) of the east plains. Lower credit flow per hectare was seen in Gopalganj (Rs. 132.6), Madhubani (Rs. 129.3), Sitamarhi (Rs. 178.3), Vaishali (Rs. 177.5), Saharsa (Rs. 165.9), Purnea (Rs. 182.4), and Bhagalpur (Rs. 189.9). Hazaribagh of the plateau zone had a low level of credit flow per hectare (Rs. 124.5).
iii) Credit Share in Agriculture:
The plateau zone had a relatively high level of credit flow per hectare due to a higher share of credit to non-agricultural sectors, with agriculture accounting for only 55.21% of the total credit flow. In contrast, other zones had a higher share of credit to agriculture, ranging from 68.0% to 73.0%. High shares of credit to agriculture were noted in districts such as West Champaran (86.28%), East Champaran (78.23%) of the north-west plains; Begusarai (87.09%), Katihar (75.47%), and Purnea (76.86%) of the east plains; Nawadah (89.57%), Nalanda (85.88%), and Aurangabad (85.62%) of the south-west plains; and Santhal Parganas (79.28%) of the plateau zone.
XI.5 Recovery Performance
i) Overdues and Recovery Rates:
High overdues of institutional credit have been a significant issue in Bihar. The recovery performance of PACS was 42.95% in 1985-86, improved to 55.62% in 1988-89, but dropped to 1.65% in 1989-90. Recovery rates remained low in subsequent years.
The recovery performance of SLDB was 85.25% in 1986-87 but fell sharply to 17.38% in 1987-88 and 19.42% in 1988-89. Recovery performance increased to 53.81% in 1990-91 due to loan waiver schemes but declined again to 16.22% in 1992-93.
Commercial banks showed relatively better recovery performance, with rates ranging from 33.85% in 1992-93 to 59.76% in 1991-92 during the period from 1985-86 to 1992-93.

Conclusions
XI.13 Broad Conclusions on Institutional Credit Flow in Bihar
i) Credit Gap: The gap between estimated credit requirements (as per the Sen Committee/Task Force/Potential Linked Plan) and actual credit flow has been significant, with not even half of the estimated requirements being met. This gap is widening due to a downward trend in credit flow.
ii) Comparison with Other States: The flow of credit in Bihar has been disappointing compared to other major states. For example, it was Rs. 5,961 per hectare in Kerala, Rs. 2,155 in Tamil Nadu, and Rs. 1,189 in Punjab, compared to Rs. 312 in Bihar in 1991-92.
iii) Share of Agriculture: The share of agriculture in total credit flow was high but fluctuated significantly from year to year.
iv) Decline in Co-operative Credit: Co-operative credit has been declining, with its share in total credit flow being almost negligible in recent years.
v) Commercial Banks' Role: Commercial banks have been the primary source of credit disbursement in the State. However, their performance has been less than expected, with a mismatch between deposit mobilization and advances.
vi) Regional Distribution: District-wise analysis showed that agriculturally prosperous zones/districts received relatively more credit. Credit per hectare was higher in areas with high food grains production.
vii) Regional Bias: Regional biases in credit flow were minimal, with the plateau zone receiving a similar level of share in total credit flow compared to other zones. The plateau zone even had a higher per hectare credit flow than the north-west and east plains.
viii) Recovery Issues: The problem of high overdues has been severe in Bihar. Recovery levels were below 5.0% for PACS and under 20.0% for SLDB in recent years. While commercial banks showed relatively better recovery performance, it was still not encouraging.

CHAPTER XII: OPERATIONAL HOLDINGS AND TENANCY STATUS
The present chapter attempts to understand broad features of operational holdings as well as tenancy status in the State. It also examines the adverse influence of these factors on the status of agriculture in the State. Analysis is based on secondary data available from the census of agriculture and other published sources.

XII.1 Operational Holdings
XII.2 Distribution and Size of Operational Holdings
Analysis of the distribution of operational holdings by size class of farmers at different points of time shows that the marginal and small farmers, with their combined share at 86.75% in 1980-81, dominated in the State. The numerical presence of such categories of farmers was much higher in Bihar compared to the national average of 76.23%.
The numerical strength of marginal farmers increased rapidly from 48.74 lakh in 1970-71 to 85.12 lakh in 1980-81, while the increase for small and semi-medium farmers was marginal. Medium and large farmers, on the other hand, showed a sharp decline in their numerical strength.
Compared to the national average, the increase in the numerical strength of marginal farmers and the decline of medium and large farmers was more pronounced in Bihar.
XII.3 Size and Increase in Operational Holdings
There were 117.1 lakh operational holdings with an area of 102.4 lakh hectares in the State in 1985-86. The average size of operational holding was only 0.87 ha. The average size of operational holding in Bihar was much smaller compared to states such as Haryana (2.75 ha.), Punjab (3.76 ha.), Andhra Pradesh (1.72 ha.), and Orissa (1.47 ha.). The all-India average was 1.57 ha.
The number of operational holdings increased from 75.8 lakh in 1970-71 to 117.1 lakh in 1985-86, a rise of 54.56%. This increase was higher in Bihar compared to the national level (48.24%) during this period. Bihar's increase was second only to Andhra Pradesh (71.22%).
Despite the increase, the size of operational holdings declined in Bihar, showing a -10.85% decline, compared to increases in most other states. This decline was attributed to decreasing net sown area and increasing current fallow and barren land.
XII.4 Size of Marginal Farmers' Holdings
The average size of operational holdings for marginal farmers in Bihar was 0.35 ha., less than the national average of 0.39 ha. in 1980-81. The average size for this category of farmers did not reduce significantly over the years. The small size of holdings raises concerns about viability, leading to phenomena such as reverse leasing, where marginal farmers lease out land to larger farmers.
XII.5 Regional Pattern in Operational Holdings
Analysis of operational holdings across different zones/districts reveals significant skewness. Districts like Purnea, Muzaffarpur, and Gaya had large numbers of operational holdings, while districts like Katihar and Nawadah had fewer. The number of operational holdings did not consistently correlate with population density or the number of households.
Notable increases in operational holdings were observed in districts such as Muzaffarpur (154.05%), Purnea (86.42%), Gopalganj (140.07%), Sitamarhi (84.08%), and Palamu (71.45%). However, Nawadah experienced a decline (-4.45%), while other districts such as Aurangabad, Singhbhum, Samastipur, Munger, Saharsa, Katihar, and Ranchi showed relatively less increase, attributed to partial implementation of land consolidation.
XII.6 Shrinkage in Operated Area
In many districts, the operated area showed a shrinkage. Significant declines were recorded in Nawadah (-35.71%), Madhubani (-20.67%), Samastipur (-21.24%), Munger (-28.43%), and Saharsa (-39.85%). In districts with increased operated area, the rise was marginal. The combined effect of increasing operational holdings and decreasing operated area led to a decline in the average size of holdings across districts.
XII.7 Surplus Land
Land concentration issues are severe in Bihar, with 11.63% of the area owned and operated by just 0.64% large farmers. Land ceiling laws were imposed to address this issue, resulting in 197.9 thousand hectares of land being declared surplus. Of this, 168.0 thousand hectares were taken possession of and 119.4 thousand hectares were distributed as of January 1995.
Compared to other major states, Bihar's land possession rate (84.87%) and land distribution rate (71.08%) are relatively low. Discrepancies in the declared surplus land and actual surplus land are significant, with government estimates of surplus land (158.9 thousand hectares) being much lower than actual estimates (731.0 thousand hectares). Only 21.67% of the estimated surplus land was acquired, and 14.77% was distributed.
XII.8 Fragmentation of Land - Need for Consolidation
The problem of fragmented land holdings is significant in Bihar. The average number of fragments per holding ranged between 17 and 20 plots in 1980-81, likely increasing due to subdivisions. Fragmentation has led to extreme scattering of land holdings, creating manageability issues and necessitating leasing out of land.
Fragmentation hinders the application of modern technology, mechanical irrigation, and the use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides. Consolidation of fragmented holdings is crucial for optimizing agricultural gains. Although consolidation programs were undertaken in several districts, they have largely stalled due to lack of political will and administrative efforts.
XII.9 Concealed Tenancy
Inspired by the success of Operation Barga in West Bengal, tenancy reforms in Bihar are needed, especially considering the skewed land distribution and absentee landowners. Although the Bihar Tenancy Act aims to confer ownership rights to cultivators leasing land, its implementation has been ineffective.
Oral tenancy practices persist, often exploitative and providing little security to cultivators. Leased-in area estimates are grossly underestimated, with NSS data showing a decline from 14.50% in 1970-71 to 10.72% in 1981-82. Estimates by A.N. Sinha Institute and Hanumantha Rao suggest much higher concealed tenancy rates (50.0 to 60.0%).
XII.10 Forms of Tenancy
Research indicates that one-third of tenants were pure tenants, while two-thirds were owner-cum-tenants. Pure tenants were mostly from scheduled castes or OBCs, while owner-cum-tenants included a larger proportion of OBCs and upper castes. Leasing out land was often caste-based and fragmented to circumvent tenancy laws.
Sharecropping was the dominant form of tenancy (97%) with fixed produce arrangements, while fixed cash systems were rare. Sharecropping arrangements were found to be exploitative, with tenants often receiving only 15.0% of net returns after deductions, compared to 35.0% for landowners.
XII.11 Absentee Cultivation

CHAPTER XII
OPERATIONAL HOLDINGS AND TENANCY STATUS
The present chapter attempts to understand broad features of operational holdings as well as tenancy status in the State. It also examines the adverse influence of these on the status of agriculture in the State. Analysis is based on secondary data as available from census of agriculture and other published sources.

I. Operational Holdings
XII.2 Analysis of the Distribution of Operational Holdings
Analysis of the distribution of operational holdings by size class of farmers at different points of time shows that the marginal and small farmers, with their combined share at 86.75% in 1980-81, dominated in the State. The numerical presence of such categories of farmers was much more in Bihar compared to the national average of 76.23%. Moreover, while the numerical strength of marginal farmers was increasing rapidly from 48.74 lakh in 1970-71 to 85.12 lakh in 1980-81, the increase in the case of small farmers and semi-medium farmers was marginal. The medium and large farmers, on the other hand, showed a sharp decline in their numerical strength. Compared to the national average, the process of increase in the numerical strength of marginal farmers and decline of medium and large farmers was much sharper in Bihar.
XII.3 Operational Holdings and Area
There were 117.1 lakh operational holdings with an area of 102.4 lakh hectares in the State in 1985-86. The average size of operational holding was only 0.87 ha. With a relatively large number of operational holdings and a low area under cultivation, the average size of operational holding (0.87 ha.) was much less for Bihar compared with states such as Haryana (2.75 ha.), Punjab (3.76 ha.), Andhra Pradesh (1.72 ha.), and Orissa (1.47 ha.). The average size of operational holding at the all-India level, at 1.57 ha., was much higher than in Bihar. Furthermore, the number of operational holdings was rapidly increasing in the State. While there were 75.8 lakh operational holdings in 1970-71, it increased to 117.1 lakh in 1985-86, recording an increase of 54.56% in one and a half decades. The increase was much higher in Bihar than at the national level (48.24%) during this period. Across different states, the increase in the number of operational holdings in Bihar was only next to Andhra Pradesh (71.22%). The matter becomes even more serious when examining the trend in the growth of the size of operational holding. While most states, including Punjab, Haryana, West Bengal, and Andhra Pradesh, showed an increase in the size of operational holding, albeit marginally, in Bihar, Orissa, and Uttar Pradesh, it showed a declining trend. The level of decline (-10.85%) was, however, much more significant in Bihar during this period. The decline in the size of operational holding in the State could be seen largely in the declining net sown area on the one hand and increasing current fallow and barren land on the other. As the area of operational holdings of marginal farmers increased from 18.38 lakh ha. in 1970-71 to 25.79 lakh ha. in 1976-77 and 29.56 lakh ha. in 1980-81, the increased number of marginal farmers in the State over these years could be attributed to growing subdivision and marginalization processes, with semi-marginal and small farmers turning increasingly into marginal farmers. Again, the sharp decline in the number of large farmers could partly be seen in the implementation of land ceiling laws in the State.
XII.4 Size of Operational Holdings for Marginal Farmers
The average size of operational holdings for marginal farmers in Bihar at 0.35 ha. was relatively less compared to the national average of 0.39 ha. in 1980-81. Over the years, however, the average size of operational holdings for such a category of farmers does not seem to have reduced significantly. The fact that 75.81% of the farmers had a mere 0.35 ha. as average holding size gives cause for concern, more on account of the viability question. This seems to have given rise to the phenomenon of reverse leasing where marginal farmers lease out land to bigger size farmers.

II. Regional Pattern in Operational Holdings
XII.5 Distribution of Operational Holdings Across Districts
Analysis of the number of operational holdings across different zones/districts suggests that there was a large skewness in the distribution of land in districts such as Purnea, Muzaffarpur, and Gaya. It was relatively much less in districts such as Katihar and Nawadah. The number of operational holdings did not seem to be related to the density of population as well as the number of households. Analysis further suggests that the number of operational holdings increased significantly in most of the districts. The rate of increase in the number of operational holdings over the decade 1971-81 was as high as 154.05% in Muzaffarpur, 86.42% in Purnea, 140.07% in Gopalganj, 84.08% in Sitamarhi, and 71.45% in Palamu. Amidst such an increasing number of operational holdings, however, Nawadah (-4.45%) showed a decline in the number of operational holdings during the same period. In the case of Aurangabad, Singhbhum, Samastipur, Munger, Saharsa, Katihar, and Ranchi, the increase in the number of operational holdings was relatively much less. This could be attributed largely to partial implementation of land consolidation in these districts.
XII.6 Shrinkage in Operated Area
In most of the districts, the operated area showed a shrinkage. The shrinkage in the operated area was as high as (-35.71%) in Nawadah, (-20.67%) in Madhubani, (-21.24%) in Samastipur, (-28.43%) in Munger, and (-39.85%) in Saharsa. In the case of districts showing an increase in operated area, the increase was observed to be marginal. The decline in operated area, along with the increasing number of operational holdings, resulted in a declining average size of holding in all the districts.

III. Surplus Land
XII.7 Land Concentration and Ceiling Laws
The problem of land concentration has been acute in the State, with as much as 11.63% of the area being owned and operated by just 0.64% of large farmers. It warranted imposition of land ceiling and distribution of the surplus land among the potential beneficiaries. As a result of the stringent land ceiling laws, a total of 197.9 thousand hectares of land have been declared surplus in the State, of which 168.0 thousand hectares were taken possession of, and 119.4 thousand hectares were distributed as of January 1995. Compared to other major states, however, the land possession rate as well as land distribution rate has been relatively low at 84.87% and 71.08% in Bihar. While the land ceiling laws as such have been found to be adequate, serious doubts have been expressed about their implementation. The surplus land declared by the Government was observed to be grossly understated. According to Bharati, while the surplus land declared by the Government was 158.9 thousand hectares, the estimated surplus land was around 731.0 thousand hectares. Thus, the gap between the estimated surplus land and declared surplus was almost 4.5 times. Against the estimated surplus land, only 21.67% was found to have been acquired, and 14.77% was distributed.

IV. Fragmentation of Land - Need for Consolidation
XII.8 Fragmented Land Holdings
The problem of fragmented land holding is no less in Bihar. According to field investigations conducted by AERC, Shantiniketan, the average number of fragments per holding varied between 17 and 20 plots in Bihar in 1980-81. Over these years, the fragmentation of holding might have further increased mostly as a result of subdivisions. Iyer makes a similar observation to convey that "lack of consolidation in Bihar has resulted in extreme scattering of land holdings. Often a land holding of five acres may be scattered over 10-15 plots and could be spread in different parts of the village. This creates a problem of manageability, forcing them to lease out land on a sharecropping basis."
XII.9 Adverse Impacts of Fragmented Holdings
Such large fragmented holdings create a number of other adverse impacts as well, especially on the diffusion of modern technology. It restricts the application of mechanical mode. The kind of irrigation technologies being propagated and widely used in Bihar were also not appropriate in such a situation because of their non-divisibility. This hinders accessibility to irrigation on such plots of land despite immense groundwater irrigation potential. It also limits the use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides. If the gains of modern technology are to be reaped optimally and taken to the doors of cultivators, the consolidation of fragmented holdings would have to be accorded due importance. Although the program of consolidation was taken up in a number of districts, mainly in the north-west and the east plains, the program seems to have fizzled out, more on account of lack of political will on the one hand and absence of missionary zeal on the part of civil servants on the other.

V. Concealed Tenancy
XII.10 Need for Tenancy Reforms
Going by the success of Operation Barga in West Bengal, which facilitated tenancy reforms with a package of on-farm development programs, tenancy reforms in Bihar become all the more imperative, more so in the context of skewed land distribution and absentee landlords. Although the Bihar Tenancy Act was meant to confer ownership rights to cultivators of land on lease, its implementation has been observed to be largely ineffective. While the Tenancy Act is applicable in theory, its application on the ground has been negligible. The practice of oral tenancy continues to be prevalent and is often found to be exploitative in nature. The tenants, being insecure, have little incentive to invest in land, leading to under-investment. Moreover, there is a lack of institutional credit support to such tenants due to the prevailing security norms and rigidities of the bankers. This puts such farmers outside the gamut of bank loan for acquisition of land-based farm assets.
XII.11 Concealed Tenancy Estimates
The extent of concealed tenancy is still widely disputed. While Prasad (1993) estimates it to be around 35.0% of sharecropping, Iyer (1993) considers it to be around 25.0%. Even if we consider the conservative estimate, i.e., 25%, the extent of absentee cultivation could be put at 16.60 lakh hectares, which constitutes 15.0% of the total area under operational holding in the State.

VI. Forms of Tenancy
XII.12 Types of Tenancy Arrangements
Research indicates that nearly one-third of tenants are pure tenants, while two-thirds are owner-cum-tenants. The pure tenants are predominantly from the scheduled castes and OBCs, while owner-cum-tenants include a larger proportion of OBCs and upper castes. It is observed that leasing out land often tends to be caste-based and fragmented to circumvent tenancy laws. Sharecropping, with crop sharing arrangements, is the dominant form of tenancy (97%), while fixed produce arrangements are rare. Fixed cash systems are also found to be rare. Sharecropping arrangements have been found to be exploitative, with tenants receiving only about 15.0% of net returns after deducting various expenses compared to 35.0% of net returns for landowners.

VII. Absentee Cultivation
XII.13 Issues with Absentee Cultivation
Absentee cultivation, which includes sharecroppers who cultivate land on lease from landlords not residing in the village (either working in the tertiary/service sector or residing in other villages), is considered one of the worst forms of sharecropping. It discourages all types of entrepreneurial and innovative approaches to farming, as absentee landlords typically show indifference to farm investments and maintenance. The extent of absentee cultivation in Bihar is subject to debate. While Prasad estimates it at 35.0% of sharecropping, Iyer estimates it at 25.0%. Even with a conservative estimate of 25%, absentee cultivation amounts to 16.60 lakh hectares, which forms 15.0% of the total area under operational holdings in the State.

Conclusions
XII.18 Broad Conclusions
i) Number of operational holdings was fast increasing in the State, rendering the operational holdings of a large number of marginal farmers as non-viable.
ii) The area under operational holdings showed a declining trend largely because of declining net sown area on the one hand and increasing current fallow/barren land on the other.
iii) Across different districts, the number of operational holdings was much larger in the north-west and the east plains. Districts where land consolidation was implemented even partially showed lower increases in the number of operational holdings.
iv) Over and above the land ceiling, the state had a large estimated surplus land of around 731.0 thousand hectares.
v) The high fragmentation of land holdings, often 15-20 parcels, posed a bigger problem for the state in the dissemination of technology and called for urgent land consolidation.
vi) The land lease market was all pervasive in the State, forming nearly 50-60% of the total operational holdings.
vii) The dominant form of lease was oral tenancy (97%), mostly with crop-sharing arrangements.
viii) The menace of absentee cultivation was still sharp, forming around 15.0% of the operational holdings. This chunk of land remained out of the gamut of farm investment as a result of indifferent attitudes of the landowners and the inability of the lessee to raise funds for investments.

Bibliography
Bardhan, Pranab K. (1984). Land Labour and Rural Poverty: Essays In Development Economics. Oxford University Press, Delhi.
Bharadwaj, Krishna (1994). Accumulation, Exchange and Development. Sage Publications, New Delhi.
Chadha, G.K. (1986). The State and Rural Economic Transformation: The Case of Punjab, 1950-1985. Sage Publications, New Delhi.
Dantwala, M.L. (Ed.) (1986). Indian Agricultural Development since Independence. Oxford and IBH, New Delhi.
Hague, T. and A.S. Sirohi (1986). Agrarian Reforms and Institutional Changes in India. Concept Publishing Company, New Delhi.
Laxminarayan, H. and S.S. Tyagi (1982). Changes in Agrarian Structure in India. AERG, University of Delhi, New Delhi.
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (1994). Report of the Task Force on Action Plan for Improvement in Rural Credit in Bihar State. Bombay.
Parde, M.P. (1986). Land Records and Agrarian Situation in Bihar (A Pilot Study). Mimeo, A.N. Sinha Institute, Patna.
Prasad, P.H. (1986). Land Reforms in Bihar: A Case Study. Mimeo, A.N. Sinha Institute, Patna.
Prasad, P.H. (1989). Lopsided Growth: The Political Economy of Indian Development. Oxford University Press, Bombay.
Reserve Bank of India (1984). Report of the Committee on Agricultural Productivity in Eastern India (Chairman Dr. S.R. Sen).
Shankar, Kripa (1980). Conceded Tenancy and its Implications for Equity and Economic Growth. Concept Publications, New Delhi.
Sharma, Alakh N. and Shaibal Gupta (Ed.) (1987). Bihar: Stagnation or Growth. Spectrum Publishing House, Patna.
Yugandhar, B.N. and K. Gopal Iyer (Ed.) (1993). Land Reforms in India - Bihar - Institutional Constraints. Vol. 1, Sage Publications, New Delhi.


