                                           
 
GOVERNMENT OF BIHAR
DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL AND FISH RESOURCES
DRAFT FISHERIES POLICY
22000088
DIRECTORATE OF FISHERIES
Fisheries Policy 2008

THE GOAL
Development and management of fisheries and aquaculture resources for providing sustainable livelihoods to rural poor communities and overall economic growth of the State with due considerations to environmental well-being, gender concerns, socio-economic and cultural aspirations of the people of Bihar with special attention to fishers and fish farmers.
A knowledge-driven development organisation with dynamic, motivated, and professional human resources that delivers quality extension services, co-manages resources with stakeholders, guides sustainable and equitable development, and is modern, accessible, and accountable.

1. Need and Rationale for Fisheries Policy
The economy of Bihar is mainly dependent on agriculture, animal husbandry, and fisheries. Fisheries and aquaculture sector play a key role in food security and employment generation as a significant proportion of the population depend upon fisheries, aquaculture, and allied activities for their livelihood sustenance and income. Besides, the sector also generates precious revenue for the State. The importance of the fisheries sector to the State economy has increased particularly after the creation of Jharkhand as a separate State. The State has two distinct land masses on either side of the holy River Ganga and is divided into 38 administrative districts, 21 in North Bihar and 17 in South Bihar. Bihar, lying in the heart of Gangetic plain, is blessed with fertile land resources though extreme hot and cold climatic conditions along with flood and drought situations are characteristic parts of the geography.
The State is endowed with rich aquatic and fisheries resources in the form of rivers, flood plains, wetlands (chaurs), ox-bow lakes (mauns), reservoirs, tanks, and ponds. The main culture fishery resources of Bihar lie in over 43,000 ponds and tanks of variable sizes covering a total area of about 65,000 ha distributed throughout the length and breadth of the State. Flood plains and other wetlands locally known as chaur are other major fisheries resources and measure about 45,978 ha which are found mainly in the basins of Kosi-Gandak river systems of North Bihar. Estimates prepared by the Irrigation Department indicate several fold higher figures. Ox-bow lakes, locally known as mauns, are the discarded loops of meandering rivers which got cut off from the main rivers and is estimated to be about 9,000 ha. The 29 reservoirs in the State covering a total water spread area of about 11,000 ha is an important resource for fisheries development. Besides, 3,200 km of rivers are the main resource for capture-based fisheries in the State.
The annual fish production of the State, both from aquaculture and capture fisheries, has been estimated at 0.261 million tons against a demand of approximately 0.456 million tons. This has remained almost stagnant for many years. Evidently, there exists a wide gap between demand and supply, to the tune of 43%, which is quite paradoxical in view of the vast fisheries resources in the State. The unmet demand is partly met from the supply of fish from other States. Similarly, the annual demand of fish seed in the State is over 900 million, while the production is only about 350 million from the 121 government fish seed farms, two corporate-level fish hatcheries, and 26 private hatcheries.
On one hand, the State has huge underutilized and untapped fisheries resources which offers immense potential for fish production and scope for the development of rural livelihoods, while on the other, the State still depends for the supply of about half of its demand for fish from other states. The very low average productivity in all culture-based fisheries ecosystems, poor socio-economic condition of fishers and fish farmers, lack of adequate public and private investment and capital flow into the fisheries sector, lack of awareness about aquaculture as a viable and profitable economic activity, non-availability of adequate and professionally skilled human resources, ineffective and redundant service delivery systems, poor infrastructure facilities, etc., have all been responsible for the limited growth and development of the fisheries sector in Bihar. Thus there is an urgent need to bridge the gap between demand and supply of food fish and fish seed by effective and sustainable utilization of available resources.
However, a favourable legal and institutional environment needs to be created to meaningfully address these challenges in order to produce adequate and cheap food fish for all and improve the quality of life of fishers and farmers. A comprehensive and enabling fisheries and aquaculture policy is a necessary prerequisite to provide overall direction, develop appropriate strategies, support implementation of development programs, and mobilise resources for the full-fledged growth and development of fisheries sector. In the changing scenario of globalization and increasing market integration, a dynamic policy is vital to steer the fisheries sector through the higher growth trajectory by tapping the new opportunities and tackling the impending challenges.
The overall objective of the fisheries and aquaculture policy shall be to increase the fish production on a sustainable basis to ensure food and livelihood security in the rural sector.
Within this broader context, the specific objectives of Fisheries Policy are:
To promote development and management of all fisheries and aquaculture resources to become a food and seed fish surplus State in an ecologically sound, economically viable, and socio-culturally compatible manner.
To provide adequate, sustainable, and equitable livelihood to fishers and fish farmers, and ensure availability of cheap and quality fish to all.
To generate entrepreneurial and employment opportunities, and facilitate creation of necessary infrastructure facilities through public and private investment in fisheries and aquaculture sector.
To conserve and manage the fisheries resources and fish biodiversity for its sustainable utilization.
To create wider social awareness about the importance of fisheries and aquaculture and promote consumption of fish as wholesome food.
To transform the Directorate of Fisheries into a professional agency providing extension services to fishers, farmers, and entrepreneurs following a people-centered approach to development.

2. Data Gathering and Development Planning
Timely, complete, and reliable statistics on potential resources, status of utilization, resource-wise and species-wise production and productivity levels, catch and fishing effort, different socio-economic parameters, and market information is essential for formulation of relevant policies, programs, and action plans. At present, there is no established and foolproof system for systematic and regular collection of data on fisheries in the State. Only crude estimations and approximations with wide margins of error form the basis of development planning and management.
The policy envisages institutionalizing a mechanism for systematic collection, verification, and updating of timely, complete, and reliable statistics on various physical, biological, economic, and social parameters of fisheries as per the nationally and internationally agreed format. Involvement of various stakeholders particularly the producer groups will be strongly encouraged in both collection and verification of various statistics. Measures are to be initiated for proper categorization, analysis, and wider dissemination of data thus generated and maintaining a computerized database for easy retrieval. Remote sensing and Geographical Information System would be deployed for survey of various resources especially the open water bodies to be followed by ground truthing.

3. Development of Aquaculture in Ponds
Tanks and ponds of water spread area less than 10 ha in sizes that can be classified as ponds total an area of about 65,000 ha. Of these, about 22,000 ha are constituted by individual ponds of sizes less than 0.5 ha while about 26,500 number of water bodies with water spread area between 0.5 and 10 ha constitute a cumulative water spread area of 43,000 ha. Presently, aquaculture in ponds and tanks remains the main support for the livelihood of the poor fish farmers in rural areas. However, the productivity of ponds is only about 800 kg/ha which is much below their potential of 3000-5000 kg/ha/year.
Fragmented and small size of land holdings due to higher growth rate of population, heavy siltation and poor physical condition of ponds, and traditional culture practices have made the pond aquaculture remain as a subsistence activity. The policy proposes to bring aquaculture at par with agriculture in terms of credit, taxation, energy charges, water tariff, and land allocation owing to the similarities between the two sectors in the resource use pattern, providing livelihood support to fishing and farming households and further fisheries development in the State. The policy envisages that all types of water bodies below 10 ha in size shall be brought under improved scientific composite fish culture and achieve an annual average productivity of 3000-5000 kg/ha. This is to be made possible by restoration and renovation of existing water bodies, creation of new water bodies, imparting training on appropriate technologies, extension support and ensuring availability of all inputs and support services including credit facilities. Also, support under various schemes is to be mobilized for renovation of the Government ponds.

4. Development of Fisheries in Ox-Bow Lakes
An estimated 9,000 ha of water spread area varying in size from 4 to 400 ha in the form of ox-bow lakes or mauns offers immense scope for scientific culture-based fisheries development supporting a sizeable number of fishers and small and marginal farming households. These lakes are the discarded loops of meandering rivers, mainly in the Gandak basin, which gets disconnected and connected with the main rivers during floods or rainy season thereby drawing water. At present, mainly capture fisheries is practiced, and only about 2700 ha area i.e. less than one-third of available area has been brought under culture with an average productivity of 300-400 kg/ha/yr. The lakes have been subjected to a number of stress factors like heavy infestation of aquatic weeds, siltation, encroachment, habitat degradation, etc., leading to considerable decline in its physical expanse and aquatic biodiversity.
The policy seeks to bring almost every ox-bow lake under improved culture fisheries and achieve an annual average productivity of 1000-2000 kg/ha by introducing modern technologies, extension support, input and credit facilities, conservation measures, and protection measures against encroachment and degradation. Also, research support on breeding, seed production, and culture practices in ox-bow lakes will be sought. Water resources and ecological parameters of the lakes will be monitored regularly and maintained. Lake users will be organized into co-operatives to manage, develop, and protect the water bodies and other common resources collectively.

5. Development of Flood Plain Wetlands
Flood plains and wetlands locally known as chaurs, are extensive and support major fisheries resources of the State, particularly in North Bihar. These areas have an estimated water spread of about 45,978 ha which have been estimated to be several times higher by the Irrigation Department. At present, only about 27% of the total area has been brought under culture fisheries with an average productivity of 300-500 kg/ha/year. The remaining areas support extensive capture fisheries as well as unscientific aquaculture.
The policy envisages scientific development of all flood plain wetlands for culture fisheries and aims to achieve an annual average productivity of 1000-2000 kg/ha/year. The strategy includes scientific and efficient utilization of flood plain wetlands, improving and upgrading their ecological status and water resources, introduction of improved culture practices and extension support, provision of adequate inputs and credit facilities, protection of wetlands from overexploitation and degradation, and strengthening of the institutional mechanisms for wetland management.

6. Development of Reservoir Fisheries
Bihar has 29 reservoirs with a water spread of about 11,000 ha. The productivity of these reservoirs has been low compared to their potential. Reservoir fisheries are dependent on natural recruitment and occasional stocking of exotic species.
The policy proposes scientific management of all reservoirs and introduction of comprehensive fisheries development programs with improved stocking practices, efficient fishery management techniques, extension support, and infrastructure facilities. Productivity of reservoirs is to be increased to the level of 200-300 kg/ha/year with a focus on sustainable management practices and community participation.

7. Development of Riverine Fisheries
The State has about 3,200 km of rivers which support capture fisheries. River fisheries are dependent on natural resources and face problems of habitat degradation, pollution, and overfishing.
The policy aims to enhance river fisheries through conservation of river habitats, regulation of fishing activities, promotion of sustainable fishing practices, and community involvement in river management. The strategy includes development of riverine fishery resources, ensuring sustainable fish production, and addressing issues related to pollution and habitat degradation.

8. Seed Production and Supply
The annual demand for fish seed in Bihar exceeds 900 million while the production is only about 350 million from various sources. There is a need to enhance the seed production capabilities to meet the growing demand.
The policy proposes to strengthen existing fish seed production facilities, establish new hatcheries, and promote private sector participation in seed production. Measures will be taken to improve the quality of seed, ensure regular monitoring and certification, and facilitate distribution to fish farmers and aquaculture practitioners.

9. Development of Fisheries Infrastructure
Infrastructure development is crucial for the growth of the fisheries sector. The State needs to invest in various infrastructure facilities including cold storage, processing units, marketing facilities, and transportation.
The policy aims to create a comprehensive infrastructure development plan, attract private investment, and enhance existing facilities. Support will be provided for the establishment of cold storage units, fish processing plants, and marketing infrastructure to improve the overall efficiency of the fisheries sector.

10. Training, Research, and Extension Services
Training, research, and extension services are essential for the successful implementation of the fisheries policy. Capacity building of stakeholders, development of new technologies, and dissemination of knowledge are critical components.
The policy proposes to strengthen training programs, promote research activities, and improve extension services. Collaboration with research institutions, universities, and other stakeholders will be encouraged to ensure the availability of updated knowledge and technologies.

11. Legal and Institutional Framework
A robust legal and institutional framework is necessary for effective policy implementation. This includes the development of regulations, enforcement mechanisms, and institutional arrangements.
The policy aims to review and update existing regulations, establish clear roles and responsibilities for different institutions, and ensure effective enforcement of laws. Institutional mechanisms will be strengthened to support policy implementation and facilitate coordination among various stakeholders.

12. Financing and Investment
Adequate financing and investment are crucial for the successful implementation of the fisheries policy. The policy proposes various strategies to mobilize resources and ensure efficient utilization.
The policy includes measures to attract public and private investment, facilitate access to credit, and utilize financial resources effectively. Support will be provided for the development of financial mechanisms and partnerships to ensure sustainable growth of the fisheries sector.

13. Monitoring and Evaluation
Monitoring and evaluation are essential for assessing the progress of policy implementation and making necessary adjustments. A systematic approach to monitoring and evaluation will be adopted.
The policy proposes to establish a monitoring and evaluation framework, set up performance indicators, and regularly review progress. Feedback from stakeholders will be collected and used to improve policy implementation and address emerging issues.

14. Gender and Social Equity
Ensuring gender and social equity is vital for inclusive development. The policy emphasizes the need to address gender disparities and promote social equity in fisheries development.
The policy aims to incorporate gender and social equity considerations in all aspects of fisheries development, including access to resources, benefits, and decision-making processes. Special attention will be given to the needs and aspirations of marginalized and vulnerable groups.

15. Environmental Sustainability
Environmental sustainability is a key concern in fisheries development. The policy emphasizes the need to protect and conserve aquatic ecosystems and biodiversity.
The policy includes measures to promote environmentally sustainable practices, address issues related to pollution and habitat degradation, and conserve aquatic biodiversity. Strategies will be developed to minimize the environmental impact of fisheries activities and ensure long-term sustainability.

16. Stakeholder Participation and Community Involvement
Stakeholder participation and community involvement are crucial for effective policy implementation. The policy proposes to actively engage stakeholders and communities in decision-making processes.
The policy aims to strengthen mechanisms for stakeholder participation, encourage community-based management approaches, and promote collaboration among various actors in the fisheries sector. Stakeholders will be involved in planning, implementation, and monitoring of fisheries development programs.

17. Conclusion
The Fisheries Policy of Bihar is a comprehensive framework aimed at achieving sustainable growth and development of the fisheries sector. By addressing key challenges, promoting effective strategies, and ensuring stakeholder involvement, the policy seeks to enhance fish production, improve livelihoods, and contribute to the overall economic development of the State.
The successful implementation of the policy will require collaborative efforts, commitment, and effective management. The Directorate of Fisheries will play a pivotal role in coordinating and facilitating the various initiatives outlined in the policy, ensuring that the objectives are met, and the benefits are realized by the people of Bihar.

 
9. Management of Riverine Fisheries
Current Status: Bihar has 3,200 km of rivers and 100,000 ha of perennial riverine command areas. Capture fisheries are declining due to habitat degradation, pollution, and destructive fishing practices. Many species have reduced in number and size.
Policy Objectives:
Implement a conservation-based regulatory approach.
Review and enforce guidelines related to fishing practices.
Engage local fishing communities, NGOs, and Community-Based Organizations (CBOs) in conservation efforts.
Protect select river stretches as sanctuaries.
Designate a State Fish to raise awareness and promote conservation.
10. Conservation of Aquatic Biodiversity
Current Status: The state’s aquatic biodiversity has been affected by human activities, leading to the decline of many species.
Policy Objectives:
Develop strategies for in-situ conservation of native aquatic species.
Create freshwater protected areas and restrict undesired exotic species.
Strengthen awareness and extension services about the impacts of exotic species.
11. Leasing and Management of Public Water Bodies
Current Issues: Previous efforts have been hampered by interference, inefficient extension services, and poor lending practices.
Policy Objectives:
Ensure transparency and effectiveness in the leasing process.
Address issues related to discretionary powers, revenue fixation, and settlement irregularities.
Review and amend the Bihar Water Bodies Management Act 2006 and its 2007 Amendment to improve management and ensure sustained production and livelihoods.
12. Marketing and Value Addition
Current Status: There is a growing demand for fish in Bihar, necessitating improvements in the supply chain.
Policy Objectives:
Develop a reliable marketing network to reduce spoilage and increase producer income.
Establish modern markets and infrastructure for fish handling and transportation.
Train women’s SHGs in value addition and marketing.
Promote fish consumption through public awareness campaigns and consider cooperative models similar to SUDHA/Mother Dairy.
13. Human Resource Development
Current Issues: There are low literacy levels, inadequate training, and systemic issues in the fisheries sector.
Policy Objectives:
Provide field-oriented training to fishers and farmers.
Reform recruitment and career advancement policies.
Strengthen and upgrade the State Fisheries Research Institute into a Fisheries Research and Training Institute.
14. Extension Service Delivery and Support System
Current Issues: The extension services are currently desk-oriented and ineffective.
Policy Objectives:
District level through the DM who also acts as Chairman of FFDA would become essential. Conservation of native fauna and effective control of pollution in open water bodies would be taken care of by coordination with the Department of Environment and Forests. Various Plans, programs and funding like State Plans, Central Plan outlays, externally funded progra ms/projects, National Fisheries Development Board, Inst itutional funding etc sh all be streamlined at state level for optimum utilis ation of funds and effective implementation of progra ms. Similarly, linkages at district level would be strengthened for convergence of funds available under different schemes like Rastriya Sam Vikas Yojana, Mukhya Mantri Vikas Yojana, Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme etc and integrate them for optimum and speedy utilisation for development. Linkages and coordination with the State level Department of Institutional Finance and Program Implementation would ensure that fisheries and aquaculture are included in district credit plans, and are considered as a separate sub-sector for NABARD funding being routed through lead banks in each district. Do the same thing with this data also
ChatGPT
Here’s a summary of the additional sections on fishers' livelihood and welfare, fisheries cooperatives, and effective linkages and coordination from the Fisheries Policy 2008:
15. Fishers' Livelihood and Welfare
Current Status: Fishers and small farmers face poverty, low literacy, high birth rates, and poor health standards. They also deal with limited access to social services, high indebtedness, alcoholism, and occupational hazards. Floods and droughts further exacerbate their difficulties.
Policy Objectives:
Improve the overall living standards of fishers and farmers.
Focus on enhancing per capita income, providing compulsory primary education, housing, safe drinking water, and group accident insurance coverage.
Implement mandatory registration and ID cards for fishers.
Ensure effective assistance from calamity relief funds and insurance companies.
Provide welfare services such as housing, drinking water, primary health care, and community centers.
Pay special attention to fisherwomen and children.
16. Fisheries Co-operatives
Current Issues: Co-operatives suffer from economic inefficiencies, lack of democratic processes, mismanagement, and lack of transparency.
Policy Objectives:
Strengthen and restructure fisheries co-operatives to be democratic and effective.
Promote awareness of rights and responsibilities among members.
Implement joint bank accounts, photo ID cards for members, and no cash transactions.
Provide incentives for best-performing societies and link registration and dispute resolution to the Department of Animal and Fish Resources.
Conduct regular surveys of socio-economic status and enhance professionalism in co-operatives.
Ensure that secretaries of co-operatives are educated and encourage education among fisher communities.
Implement RTI Act provisions for transparency.
17. Effective Linkages and Coordination
Current Issues: Effective fisheries development requires coordination with multiple departments and overcoming weak interdepartmental collaboration, particularly at the district level.
Policy Objectives:
Institutionalize linkages and coordination with relevant departments (Water Resources, Agriculture, Co-operatives, Environment and Forests, Revenue, etc.).
Revive and strengthen fisheries co-operatives and recover encroachments on government water bodies.
Coordinate with departments to update water resource databases and manage renovation works.
Ensure proper water availability for aquaculture by linking with Water Resources and Agriculture departments.
Coordinate with the Environment and Forests Department for pollution control and conservation of native fauna.
Streamline plans and funding from various sources (State Plans, Central Plans, National Fisheries Development Board, etc.) for effective implementation.
Strengthen district-level linkages for fund convergence and integration of schemes for development.
Include fisheries in district credit plans and seek NABARD funding.
These sections outline strategies to address the socio-economic challenges faced by fishers, improve the functionality of fisheries co-operatives, and enhance interdepartmental coordination for better fisheries and aquaculture development.

