BIHAR PRESERVATION AND IMPROVEMENT OF ANIMALS RULES, 1960
No.1499, dated the 28th January, 1960
In exercise of the powers conferred by section of the Bihar Preservation and Improvement of Animals Act, 1955 (Bihar Act II of 1956), the Government of Bihar hereby makes the following rules; the same having been previously published as required by sub-section (1) of the said section, namely:
RULES
1. Short title
These rules may be called the Bihar Preservation and Improvement of Animals Rules, 1960.
2. Definitions
In these rules, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context:
(a) “The Act” means the Bihar Preservation and Improvement of Animals Act, 1955;
(b) “Form” means a form set out in the Schedule;
(c) “Prescribed authority” means the authority prescribed under these rules;
(d) “Schedule” means a schedule appended in these rules;
(e) “Section” means a section of the Act;
(f) “Gosadan” means a place or institution maintained or recognized by the State Government for the purposes of keeping useless, unproductive, or invalid animals and includes a Goshala within the meaning of the Bihar Goshala Act, 1950 (Bihar Act 28 of 1950);
(g) “Chairman” means the Chairman of District Board, Local Board, Municipality, Notified Area Committee, Union Committee, Union Board and includes the Mayor / Chief Executive Officer of a Municipal Corporation and President of a Union Board;
(h) “Chief Officer” has the same meaning as is assigned to it in the Bihar Panchayat Raj Act, 1947 (Bihar Act 7 of 1948);
(i) All words and expressions used in these rules and not defined herein shall have the same meanings as are respectively assigned to them in the Act.
3. Prescribed authority under the first proviso to section 3
(1) The Veterinary Officer of the area concerned shall be the prescribed authority under the first proviso to section 3.
(2) Application for permission under the first proviso to section 3 to slaughter a bull, bullock or she-buffalo shall be made by the applicant to the Veterinary Officer stating the grounds in support of the application.
(3) The Veterinary Officer may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, allow or disallow the application but no application shall be disallowed unless the applicant has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard and of adducing evidence, if any, in support of his application.
(4) No appeal shall lie against the order of the Veterinary Officer disallowing the application.
(5) Where the Veterinary Officer allows the application, he shall grant to the applicant a certificate to that effect specifying the place of slaughter and he shall simultaneously send a copy of the certificate to the Officer-in-charge of the police-station and the Sub-divisional Magistrate within whose jurisdiction the said place is situated.
(6) A bull, bullock or she-buffalo in respect of which a certificate has been granted under sub-rule (5) shall not be slaughtered:
(a) at a public place or in public view or at any place other than the place mentioned in the certificate;
(b) without giving in writing at least a week’s notice to the Veterinary Officer of the date of slaughter which date must not be beyond twenty days of the date of the receipt of the certificate by the person in whose favour it is granted.
(7) The Veterinary Officer receiving the notice under clause (b) of sub-rule (6) shall at once send a copy of the notice to the Officer-in-charge of the police-station and the Sub-divisional Magistrate within whose jurisdiction the place of slaughter mentioned in the certificate is situated for taking such precautionary measures as they may consider necessary.
(8) The slaughter of a bull, bullock or she-buffalo in respect of which a certificate has been granted under sub-rule (5) shall be done in an enclosure by adopting humane methods of slaughter, i.e., mechanical, electrical, chemical jhatka, halal or other means by sharp cutting instruments which is found to be rapid, effective and humane.
4. Authority to whom and the manner in which a report under section 5 (1) shall be made
(1) For the purpose of sub-section (1) of section 5, the Block Development Officer, Project Executive Officer, Circle Officer, or Anchaladhikari shall be the prescribed authority to whom a report that an animal is infective shall be made.
(2) The report shall be made in Form I.
5. Manner of publication of notification under sub-section (1) of section 7
The notification under sub-section (1) of section 7 shall be in Form II and it shall be made by publishing it in the Bihar Gazette as well as by affixing a copy thereof at some conspicuous place in the infected area and the police-station under which the area is situated and it shall also be published by beat of drum in the infected area.
6. Preventive vaccination or inoculation of animals in infected area
(1) The Veterinary Officer shall vaccinate or inoculate with a vaccine or anti-serum, as the case may be, the following classes of animals in the infected area against the contagious diseases mentioned against their names, namely:
(i) Bovines including buffaloes above the age of six months – Rinderpest.
(ii) Equines, bovines including buffaloes and all bovines and elephant – Anthrax.
(iii) Bovines below the age of 2 years – Blackquarters.
(iv) Bovines including buffaloes – Haemorrhagic Septicaemia.
(v) Bovine heifer, calves including buffaloes of six months to 1 year of age and non-pregnant cows – Contagious Bovine abortion.
(vi) Bovines including buffaloes and swine – Foot-and-mouth diseases.
(vii) Sheep against Sheep-pox, Braxy, Lamb dysentery and Entero-toxaemia.
(viii) Goats against Goat-pox and Contagious Caprine Pleurepneumonia.
(ix) Swine against Swine Erysipelas, Pasteurellosis and Swine Cholera.
(x) Fowls against Ranikhet Disease, Fowl-pox, Fowl-Cholera and Fowl-typhoid.
(2) An animal vaccinated or inoculated under sub-rule (1) shall be marked by means of tattoo with the figure ‘0’ on its buttock.

 7. Manner in which applications may be made under sub-section (2) of section 10
(1) The owner of an animal or his authorized agent shall apply under sub-section (2) of section 10 in Form III to the Veterinary Officer by whom the animal has been seized.
(2) The Veterinary Officer shall, on receipt of such application, calculate the expenses incurred over the upkeep of the animal up to the date of its release at the same rates as are admissible for feeding and treatment of such animals admitted into a Veterinary Hospital of a district.
(3) The Veterinary Officer shall grant a receipt for the amount paid under sub-rule (2) to the owner or his authorized agent and deposit the amount in the nearest Treasury or sub-treasury under the head “XXX – Animal Husbandry – Other receipts – Miscellaneous Receipts – Receipts – in connection with the administration of the Bihar Preservation and Improvement of Animals Act, 1955”.
8. Disposal of unclaimed animals under sub-section (3) of section 10
(1) Where the Veterinary Officer does not send the animal to the nearest cattle pound under sub-section (3) of section 10, he shall in the first instance, serve a notice on the owner of the animal for removing the animal within 15 days of the service thereof, on payment of the charges incurred over its maintenance.
(2) In case the owner fails to remove the animal within the time specified in sub-rule (1), it shall be sold by public auction and the sale proceeds shall be paid to the owner or remitted to him by money order, if his whereabouts is known, after deducting the money order commission and the expenses incurred over its maintenance and sale. If the whereabouts of the owner is not known, the entire sale proceeds shall be deposited in the nearest Treasury or Sub-treasury under the head “XXX – Animal Husbandry – Other receipts – Miscellaneous receipts – Receipts in connection with the administration of the Bihar Preservation and Improvement of Animals Act, 1955”.
9. Disinfection of buildings, etc.
(1) A Veterinary Officer shall by an order in Form IV require the owner or the occupier or the person in charge of the building, yard, vessel, or vehicle, in which an infective animal has been kept to have the same disinfected within the time and in the manner specified in the order.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1), the Veterinary Officer may by order prescribe such other method or methods of disinfection as may appear to him to be necessary according to the special circumstances of the case.
(3) If the Veterinary Officer is not satisfied with the disinfection carried out, he may pass orders for immediate re-disinfection in proper manner of the building, yard, vessel, or vehicle in question.
10. Tests to which infective animals may be subjected under section 12
If the Veterinary Officer suspects that any animal is infective, he may put the animal to any biological or laboratory tests in the manner considered necessary including:
(a) (Double Intradermal) allergic test for tuberculosis and Johne’s disease;
(b) Mallein test for Glanders and Farcy disease; and
(c) Agglutination test for bovine contagious abortion and bacillary white diarrhea of fowls.
11. Post-mortem examination of an animal under section 13
(1) The Veterinary Officer may make or cause to be made a post-mortem examination of animals suspected to have died of rinderpest, haemorrhagic septicaemia, blackquarter or rabies.
(2) In suspected cases of anthrax, no post-mortem examination shall be conducted and the carcass shall be buried six feet deep after putting in at least half a maund of calcium carbonate.
(3) While conducting the post-mortem examination in a village, the Veterinary Officer shall take all proper precautions against the possible spread of further infection due to the opening of the carcass and as a safeguard against this, he shall get the carcass buried six feet deep in the ground with the assistance of the owner, the village headman, or others so that dogs or other animals may not dig it up.
(4) The Veterinary Officer shall record the findings of his post-mortem examination in Form V.
12. Destruction of animals in certain circumstances
If the Veterinary Officer certifies in writing that an animal is affected with tuberculosis, Johne’s disease, or rabies, he shall either destroy the animal himself, or cause it to be destroyed or deal with it in the following manner:
(i) In case of suspected tuberculosis, the Veterinary Officer shall conduct or cause to be conducted intradermal tests which may be repeated on the animal and if, after such test, he is satisfied that the case is a positive one, he shall immediately:
(a) Segregate the animal from other animals;
(b) Stop the use of the milk of the animal if the milk of such animal has been proved to be infective by a laboratory test; and
(c) Destroy by burning all the dung and urine of the infected animal.
(ii) In case of suspected Johne’s disease, the Veterinary Officer shall carry out or cause to be carried out intradermal tests which may be repeated on the animal and if, after the test, he is satisfied that the animal is suffering from Johne’s disease he shall get the animal removed to the nearest Gosadan.
(iii) In the case of suspected rabies, he shall:
(a) Forthwith isolate the affected animal and keep it under observation for a period of ten days; and
(b) If the animal dies within the said period, conduct the post-mortem examination and send a portion of the brain to the nearest Pasteur Institute or recognized Government laboratory for histo-pathological examination.
Explanation: For the purpose of destroying an animal, it should either be shot dead or killed by painless injection.
13. Prescribed age, castration, and licensing of bulls
(1) For the purpose of these rules:
(a) A bull shall be deemed to have attained the prescribed age if its two central permanent incisor teeth are fully grown; and
(b) A bull shall be deemed to have been effectively castrated if castration has been done by crushing the cord by a Surgical Castrator or by surgical operation or removal of testicles by a qualified veterinarian.
(2)
(a) Application for a license to keep an uncastrated bull under sub-section (1) of section 20 shall be made separately in respect of each bull three months after it attains the prescribed age.
(b) The application shall be in writing and shall contain the following particulars, namely:
css
Copy code
(i) The name and address of the person keeping the bull;  
(ii) The place at which the bull is kept; and  
(iii) The breed, age, color, right and any other mark of identification of the bull.

(3) On receipt of the application under sub-rule (2), the Veterinary Officer shall inspect the bull and grant a license in Form VI if in his opinion the bull is free from the defects or disease specified in sub-section (1) of section 21.
(4) A bull in respect of which a license under sub-rule (3) has been granted shall, as provided in section 28, be branded, free of charge on the left quarter with the letter “L” which should not be less than 1 1/8” x 1 1/7” in size.
(5) A license under sub-section (2) of section 20 may be granted for a period not exceeding one year and it may be renewed from time to time free of cost provided the terms and conditions set forth in Form VI are fulfilled.
14. Issue of duplicate license under sub-section (3) of section 20
(1) If a license granted under sub-section (2) of section 20 is lost or destroyed, the licensee shall make an application to the Veterinary Officer for issuing a duplicate thereof.
(2) On receipt of the application under sub-rule (1), the Veterinary Officer shall, after making such enquiry as he thinks fit and after being satisfied that the license has been actually lost or destroyed, issue a duplicate of the license to the applicant on payment of a fee of fifty naye paise in cash, and a receipt therefore shall be granted to the applicant.
(3) A duplicate license granted under sub-rule (2) shall be clearly marked “Duplicate”.
15. Payment of fees
The Veterinary Officer shall collect the receipts (on account) of the fees paid under sub-rule (2) of rule 14 in T.C. Form No. 7 and shall enter them in a cash-book in T.C. Form No. 6 (Form VII of these rules).
16. Refusal or revocation of license
(1) The revocation of a license under section 21 shall be made in Form VIII.
(2) Before revoking a license under sub-section (2) of section 21, the Veterinary Officer shall give notice to the license-holder in Form IX through the Gram Panchayat of the locality or the thana concerned where there is no Gram Panchayat asking him to show cause if any, against the proposal for the revocation of the license. The notice shall also be hung at a conspicuous place in the locality.
(3) If the license holder submits an explanation which the Veterinary Officer considers to be unsatisfactory or if he does not submit any explanation within the period specified in the notice, the Veterinary Officer may revoke the license.
(4) Before refusing to grant a license, the Veterinary Officer shall give the applicant a reasonable opportunity of being heard and shall record the reasons for the refusal.

 17. Appeal under section 22
(1) Any person aggrieved by an order of refusal to grant, or revocation of, a license under section 21, may prefer an appeal:
(i) To the Director, Animal Husbandry, Bihar, if such order has been passed by a Deputy Director of Animal Husbandry; and
(ii) To the Deputy Director, Animal Husbandry of the Range concerned, in all other cases.
(2)
(i) Every appeal preferred under sub-rule (1) shall be in the form of a memorandum. It shall specify the name and address of the appellant, the date of the order appealed against, and shall contain a clear statement of the facts and the nature of the relief prayed for. It shall be signed and verified by the appellant.
(ii) Every such appeal shall be accompanied by an authenticated copy of the order appealed against, unless the omission to produce such copy is explained to the satisfaction of the appellate authority.
(iii) The memorandum of appeal may be sent to the appellate authority by registered post or may be presented by the appellant or his agent or duly authorized legal practitioner to the appellate authority or to such other officer as the appellate authority may appoint in this behalf.
18. Inspection of bulls under section 24
A Veterinary Officer requiring a bull to be produced before him for inspection under section 24 shall serve a notice in Form X to the person keeping the bull.
19. Order under sub-section (1) of section 25 to be in Form XI
The order of the Veterinary Officer under sub-section (1) of section 25 requiring a person keeping a bull to have it castrated shall be made in Form XI.
20. The manner in which a bull shall be marked under sub-section (1) of section 27
(1) For the purpose of identification, a bull castrated under sub-section (1) of section 27 shall be branded on the right buttock with the letter “R” not smaller than 1 1/2” x 1 1/2” in size by branding-iron free of charge.
(2) In case the person keeping the bull makes his own arrangement for its castration under sub-section (2) of section 26, it shall be the duty of such person to have the bull branded in the manner indicated above.
21. Detention and disposal of a bull seized under sub-section (1) of section 27
(1) For the purpose of section 27, the Veterinary Officer visiting the locality shall make an enquiry from the Chaukidar or Chief Officer and obtain a statement in writing to ascertain the person in whose ownership, possession, or custody the bull is for the time being and then seize the bull.
(2) The bull seized under sub-section (1) of section 27 shall be detained in a pinjrapole or infirmary recognized by the State Government for not less than fourteen days from the date of its seizure. After it has been castrated and marked in the manner indicated in rule 19, it may, subject to the provision of sub-section (3) of the said section, be sold by public auction.
(3) The owner of the bull seized under sub-section (1) of section 27 may, within three months of its seizure, claim the return of the bull, if it has not been sold by public auction, or its sale proceeds if it has been sold.
22. Calculation of cost of maintenance, etc., of the bull seized
For the purpose of calculating the cost of maintenance of a bull seized under sub-section (1) of section 27, the following charges shall be taken into account:
(i) The actual transport charges or labor charges for conveying the bull from the place of seizure to the place of detention;
(ii) Feeding charges at the rates admissible for feeding such animals in Veterinary Hospital at the headquarters of a district;
(iii) Attendance charges at the rate admissible in such cases in Veterinary Hospital at the headquarters of a district; and
(iv) Actual incidental charges incurred in issuing and serving notices, etc.
23. Proceeds of sale of bull
(1) Before the bull seized is put to auction, the officer-in-charge of the pinjrapole or infirmary recognized by the State Government or the Government institution concerned, shall display on a conspicuous part of his office a notice stating:
(a) The description of the bull;
(b) The place where it was seized; and
(c) The place where it is kept in custody.
The officer shall cause proclamation of the same to be made by beat of drum in the village and at the market place nearest to the place of seizure. If the owner or his agent appears and claims the bull and its identity is established, the bull shall be delivered to the owner or his agent on payment of all costs, charges, and expenses incurred for its maintenance.
(2) If the bull is not claimed within seven days from the date of the proclamation referred to in sub-rule (1), the said officer or the officer deputed by him for the purpose, shall sell it by public auction at such place and time and subject to such conditions as the Collector of the district may, by general or special order, from time to time, direct.
(3) If the owner or his agent appears and claims the bull before it is sold and the claim is established to the satisfaction of the Veterinary Officer, it shall be delivered to the owner or his agent on payment of all costs, charges, and expenses incurred for its maintenance.
(4) If no claimant turns up, the bull shall be sold by public auction, and the sale proceeds thereof, after deducting the costs, charges, and expenses incurred for the maintenance and sale of the bull, shall be deposited in the treasury or sub-treasury under the head “XXXAH – Other Receipts – Miscellaneous Receipts – Receipts in connection with the Administration of the Bihar Preservation and Improvement of Animals Act, 1955”. If the sale proceeds are not sufficient to cover the cost of maintenance, the deficit amount shall be written off.
(5) If the bull is claimed but the cost, charges, and expenses incurred over its maintenance are neither paid nor deposited within the time fixed for the sale, the bull shall be sold by public auction. The proceeds of the sale shall, after deducting the costs, charges, and expenses incurred over the maintenance and sale of the bull, be paid to the owner after obtaining from him an acknowledgment in writing. If the sale proceeds are not sufficient to cover the costs, charges, and expenses incurred over the maintenance, the deficit shall be realized from the owner of the bull.
24. Prescribed breed of the bull and prescribed authority under section 30
(1) The following shall be the prescribed breeds for the purposes of sub-section (1) of section 30:
(a) Tharparkar
(b) Hariana
(c) Bachaur
(d) Red Sindhi
(e) Shahabadi
(f) Foreign Breeds
(g) Red Purnea
(h) Shahiwal
(i) Taylor
(j) Cross Breed of any of the above variety
(2) The prescribed authority for the purpose of sub-section (1) of section 30 shall be the Veterinary Assistant Surgeons, Animal Husbandry Extension Supervisors, and Officers superior to them of the Animal Husbandry Department.
(3) The prescribed place for preserving a bull under sub-section (2) of section 30 shall be a Gosadan or an infirmary recognized by the State Government in this behalf.
25. Specification under section 31 of officers who shall report offences, etc.
The following officers are specified as required by section 31:
(i) Agriculture Department
- Veterinary Officers
- Livestock Supervisor and Stockman
(ii) Agriculture Department
- Deputy Directors of Agriculture
- Assistant Directors of Agriculture
- District Agricultural Officers
- Sub-divisional Agricultural Officers
- Agricultural Inspectors
- Agricultural Extension Supervisors
(iii) Co-operative Department
- Assistant Registrars
- Inspectors and Supervisors of Co-operative Societies
(iv) Revenue Department
- Sub-divisional Officers
- Project Executive Officers
- Deputy Collectors
- Sub-Deputy Collectors
- Anchal Adhikaris
- Circle Inspectors
(v) Police Officers
- Inspectors
- Sub-Inspectors
- Assistant Sub-Inspectors of Police
- Dafadars and Chaukidars
(vi) Gram Panchayat Department
- District Gram Panchayat Officers
(vii) Gram Panchayat
- Sarpanch
- Chief Officers
- Panchayat Sewak
26. Powers to enter and inspect land, premises, etc. under section 32
The Veterinary Officer or any officer or person authorized by him in this behalf shall, before entering upon any land, premises, yard, building, vessel, or vehicle for the purpose of sub-section (1) of section 32, give notice in writing to the owner or occupier thereof in Form XII. No entry shall be made between the hours of 6 p.m. to 6 a.m. unless the Veterinary Officer is satisfied that it is necessary to do so in the interest of effective performance of duties under the Act. The Veterinary Officer or the officer or person authorized by him in this behalf shall, as far as practicable, be accompanied in such cases by the owner or the occupier of the land, premises, yard, building, vessel, or vehicle and by a Sarpanch, Mukhiya, Revenue Officer, or a Police Officer.
27. Prescribed authority under section 37
The prescribed authority for the purpose of section 37 shall be:
The District Magistrate
The Director of Animal Husbandry, Bihar
Joint Director of Animal Husbandry
Deputy Director of Animal Husbandry
Officers and Sub-divisional Animal Husbandry Officers within their respective jurisdictions
Provided that in respect of cases investigated by the police, the Superintendent, Additional Superintendent, and Assistant Superintendent, Deputy Superintendent of Police shall be the prescribed authority, within their respective jurisdictions.
28. Service of notices and orders under the Act
A notice or an order issued under the Act or these rules shall be served on the person concerned in any one of the following modes:
(i) By delivery or tender of a copy of the notice or order to the addressee, or his agent, or any other person duly authorized to receive such notice or order on his behalf;
(ii) By registered post.
Provided that if upon an attempt having been made to serve any such notice or order by any of the above-mentioned methods, the Veterinary Officer is satisfied that the addressee is keeping out of the way for the purpose of avoiding service, or that, for any other reason, the notice or the order cannot be served by any of the above-mentioned methods, the said officer shall order the service of such notice or order by affixing a copy thereof on some conspicuous part of the addressee’s residence where he ordinarily resides, or upon his business premises or upon some conspicuous part of any place of business, office, or residence last occupied by him, and such service shall be deemed to be as effectual as if it had been made on the addressee personally.

 29. Penalty
Any person who contravenes any provision of these rules shall, on conviction before a magistrate, be punishable with a fine that may extend to fifty rupees.

SCHEDULE
FORM I
(See Rule 3 of the Bihar Preservation and Improvement of Animals Rules, 1960)
Report about an Animal Being Infective
To,
The ………………..
I am to report that the animal of the following description, belonging to Shri ………………. of village ………………………, P.S. ……………………….., district …………………………………... has been found to be infected with …………………… disease.
Signature: …………………………
Name: ……………………………..
Designation: ……………………….
Place: ………………..
Date: …………………

FORM II
(See Rule 3 of the Bihar Preservation and Improvement of Animals Rules, 1960)
Declaration of Infected Area
Whereas it has been found that …………………… disease, which is contagious, has broken out amongst the animals of the area specified below, and there is a danger of the spread of this disease, the said area is hereby declared to be an infected area for a period of ……………………
Limits of the Infected Area:

FORM III
(See Rule 3 of the Bihar Preservation and Improvement of Animals Rules, 1963)
Application for Release of Animals Seized
To,
The Veterinary Officer,
…………………………
Sir,
The animal of the description noted below, which belongs to …………………………… and which has been seized under the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 10 of the Bihar Preservation and Improvement of Animals Act, 1955, may please be released and handed over to me as I am the owner of the animal / authorized agent of the owner of the animal. The amount due in respect of the upkeep of the animal will be paid by me before the animal is released.
Description of the Animal Seized:
Yours faithfully,
Owner of the animal / Authorized Agent
Village –
P.O. –
P.S. –
District –

FORM IV
(See Rule 3 of the Bihar Preservation and Improvement of Animals Rules, 1960)
Order to Disinfect
To,
………………………….
Whereas it has been found that the animal described below is infective within the meaning of section 11 of the Bihar Preservation and Improvement of Animals Act, 1955, I hereby direct you to disinfect the building, place, premises, shed, enclosure, vessel, and vehicle where the said animal has been kept or which has come in contact with the said animal in the following manner within seven days from the date of issue of this order.
Description of the Animal and of the Place Where Kept:
Manner in Which Disinfection Shall Be Done:
All refuse derived from cleaning of the building or the premises and all dung, litter, straw, grass, or hay shall be taken to a suitable place and burnt; any material left after burning shall be buried.
All buildings shall be whitewashed with good lime water to which 5 percent Carbolic Acid or Phenyle has been added.
The floor should be cleaned and thoroughly sprinkled with lime.
In case of suspected anthrax, the floor, after clearing, should be covered with straw which should be burnt on the floor.
In case of a vessel or a railway-box or cart with which a diseased animal has come in contact, the internal surface of these vehicles should be washed with soap and hot water containing 5 percent Carbolic Acid or Phenyle.
The internal fittings, if made of iron, shall be singed with a live flame and any other woodworks shall be burnt.
Place: ………………….
Date: ……………………
Veterinary Officer

FORM V
(See Rule 11 (4) of the Bihar Preservation and Improvement of Animals Rules, 1960)
Report on Post-Mortem Examination
Serial No.: ...........
Species: …………………
Colour: …………………
Sex: ………………
Age: ……………
Owner: …………………………………
Residence: ………………………………………………
By Whom Sent for Examination and Reasons, If Any:
Date and Hour of:
Death
P.M. Examination
History:
External Appearance on Removal of Skin (Describe Confusions etc.):
Mouth and Pharynx:

Nasal Cavities:

Larynx, Trachea:

Esophagus:

Pleural Cavity and Lungs:

Pericardium and Heart:

Peritoneal Cavity:

Liver:

Spleen:

Stomach and Small Intestines:

Large Intestine:

Urinary Organs:

Generative Organs:

Brain and Spinal Cord:

Lymph Glands in General:

Blood (State if Smears Sent for Microscopical Examination):

Diagnosis on Above Examination:

Remarks (State if Viscera Sent to Chemical Examiner, Give Date of Dispatch):

Results of:
Microscopical Examination of Blood etc.:

Chemical Analysis:

Place Where P.M. Examination Was Made:

Thana:

Inspector / Veterinary Assistant Surgeon of …………………………….
Dated ……../……../19……..

FORM VI
(See Rule 13 (3) of the Bihar Preservation and Improvement of Animals Rules, 1960)
Licence to Keep a Bull
Shri ……………………………………………………., son of …………………………………… of village ………………………………, P.S. ……………………......, District …………………... is hereby granted a licence for keeping the bull described below for breeding purposes in village ……………………….., P.S. ………………………….. district ………………………………… for the period from …………….. to …………………… both days inclusive, subject to the terms and conditions mentioned below:
The licence holder shall inform the Veterinary Officer if any illness, defect, or deformity which is likely to render the bull unsuitable for breeding purposes.
The licence holder shall give the benefit of the service of the bull to the cows of the village in which the bull is kept in preference to cows of other villages.
The licence holder shall give to the Veterinary Officer all information regarding services rendered by the bull during the period of the licence.
The licence holder shall inform the Veterinary Officer about the death of the bull or its sale or transfer to any other person with full details immediately when such death, sale, or transfer takes place.
Note: The licence shall be revoked if there is a breach of any of the terms or conditions specified above.
Licence No.:

Description of the Bull:

Breed:

Age:

Colour:

Height:

Mark of Identification (if any):

Place: ………………….
Date: ……………………
Veterinary Officer

FORM VIII
(See Rule 13 (3) of the Bihar Preservation and Improvement of Animals Rules, 1960)
Order of Revocation
To,
Shri ……………………………………….
Son of …………………………………..
Of village …………….............................., P.S. ……………………………
District …………….. …………
Whereas I am of the opinion that:
The bull in respect of which licence no. ……………… was granted to you on ……………………… is ……………………. [Note: The reason mentioned in sub-section (1) of section 21 of the Act should be mentioned here]
The licence no. …………………… was granted to you on …………………. under the following circumstances of which the Veterinary Officer was not aware at the time of granting it:
………………................................................ (Here describe the circumstances).
There has been a breach of the terms and conditions of the licence inasmuch as …………...
………………………. (Here describe the condition or term violated).
Now, therefore, I hereby revoke the said licence under section 21 and call upon you to surrender the licence to me within a week from the date of this order.
Date: …………………
Place: ………………...
Veterinary Officer
Note: The portions not required should be scored out.

FORM IX
(See Rule 16 (9) of the Bihar Preservation and Improvement of Animals Rules, 1960)
Notice of Revocation
To,
Shri ……………………………,
Son of …………………………………
Of village ………………
P.S. ………………………….
P.O. …………………………….,
District ……………………………
Whereas I am of the opinion that licence no. …………………….. was granted to you under circumstances of which the Veterinary Officer was not aware at the time of granting the licence or there has been a breach of the following terms and conditions of the licence no. ………….. granted to you ………………………………….
(Here describe the term or condition of the licence violated).
I hereby give you notice that the said licence shall be revoked after the expiry of three weeks from the date of this notice unless you submit a satisfactory explanation within the specified period as to why your licence should not be revoked.
Place: ………………………..
Date: …………………………
Veterinary Officer

FORM X
(See Rule 16 (9) of the Bihar Preservation and Improvement of Animals Rules, 1960)
To,
Shri …………………………...,
Of village ……………………
P.S. …………………………...
Where it has been brought to my notice that you keep the bull described below and I consider it necessary to inspect the bull;
Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by section 24 of the Bihar Preservation and Improvement of Animals Act, 1955, I hereby require you to produce it for inspection by me / by ……………………. deputed by me, between the hours of ………………. on the ………………… day of …………………… 19 ……… at village …………………… P.S. ……………………… district …………………. And to render all reasonable assistance in connection with such inspection to me or the officer deputed by me.
District ……………………
Description of Bull: ………………………
Breed: ……………………..
Colour: …………………………
Age: ……………
Identification Mark: ……………………..
Dated ……….. day of ……………………
Veterinary Officer

FORM XI
(See Rule 19 of the Bihar Preservation and Improvement of Animals Rules, 1960)
Order of Castration
To,
Shri …………………………,
Son of ………………………
Of village ……………...
P.S. …………………………….,
District …………………...
Whereas it has been brought to my notice that you keep the bull described below which, in my opinion, has attained the prescribed age, namely …………………………….. and in respect of which there is no licence in force under the Bihar Preservation and Improvement of Animals Act, 1955;
Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of section 25 of the Bihar Preservation and Improvement of Animals Act, 1955, I hereby require you to have the said bull castrated within one month from the date of service of this order by the method and in the manner specified below:
1. Method:
By crushing the cord by Burdizo Castrator.
2. Manner:
The bull should be taken to the nearest Veterinary Hospital or Dispensary or to the nearest Stockman for castration.
Your attention is drawn to clause (c) of section 29 of the Bihar Preservation and Improvement of Animals Act, 1955, under which a person who neglects or fails to comply with an order as made hereunder or obstructs or resists the castration of the bull as required by the order is punishable with a fine that may extend to twenty-five rupees in the case of the first offence and to fifty rupees in the case of a second or any subsequent offence.
Description of the Bull:

Breed:

Age:

Colour:

Identification Mark:

Date: ……………………
Place: ………………….
Veterinary Officer

FORM XII
(See Rule 26 of the Bihar Preservation and Improvement of Animals Rules, 1960)
Notice of Entry on Land / Premises, etc.
To,
Shri ………………….......,
Son of ……………………
Of village ………………..
P.S. ……………
District ………………………..
Whereas I consider it necessary for the proper performance of duty enjoined on me under the Bihar Preservation and Improvement of Animals Act, 1955, to inspect your land / premises / yard / building / vessel / vehicle etc., I hereby give you notice that I shall enter into the said land / premises / yard / building / vessel / vehicle between …………a.m. ……….. a.m. / p.m. ……….. on …………………...
You are therefore directed not to remove any animal or infective article from the said land, premises, yard, building, vessel, vehicle until I have inspected it.
Date: …………………
Place: …………………..
Veterinary Officer

 
 
                                                                                                                                                            
