The Bihar Goshala Regulations, 1954
Amendment Up to Date

1. Title and Enforcement
(a) These regulations may be called the Bihar Goshala Regulation, 1954.
(b) They shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification, appoint in this behalf.

2. Definitions
In these regulations, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context:
(a) ‘Act’ means the Bihar Goshala Act, 1950.
(b) ‘Manager’ means a manager appointed under Regulation III.
(c) ‘Committee’ means a committee of management elected under Regulation III.
(d) The words and expressions used in these regulations but not defined shall have the same meanings as are respectively assigned to them in the Act.

3. Committee of Management
(1) The management of every Goshala shall vest in a committee consisting of the President and not less than nine and not more than twelve members.
(2) The Sub-Divisional Officer within the local limits of whose jurisdiction a Goshala is situated shall be the ex-officio President of the Goshala.
(3) The District Animal Husbandry Officer shall be an ex-officio member of the Goshalas situated in the headquarters of a district and the Sub-Divisional Animal Husbandry Officer an ex-officio member of all other Goshalas in the sub-division.
(4) The remaining members shall be elected by subscribers.
(5) The members of the committee shall elect a Vice-President, a Secretary, and a Treasurer from among themselves.

3. A. Subscribers
Subscribers to funds of a Goshala shall comprise of:
(i) Patrons: Who pay one thousand rupees or more in lump sum.
(ii) Supporting Members: Who pay regularly and directly to the Goshala at least Rs. 50/- per year collected as charitable levy in business transactions.
(iii) Ordinary Members: Who pay at least Rs. 25/- per year directly to the Goshala.

3. B. Maintenance of Register of Subscribers
(i) Each Goshala shall maintain a register of subscribers to the funds of the Goshala in a chronological order. The list of subscribers who are entitled to vote shall be prepared by the committee and closed on the 31st of March every year. For the first election under the Act, this list shall be prepared by the existing committee of management of the Goshalas. The list shall be forwarded by the 31st of May each year to the Registrar of Goshalas, who shall forward it after due scrutiny and with such amendments as may be necessary to the President within two months of its receipt.
(a) A list of the subscribers shall be published by affixing it in some conspicuous place in the office of the Sub-Divisional Officer and in the premises of the Goshala at least two weeks before the date of the election.

3. C. Election of Committee of Management
(i) The election of the committee shall be held on a date and at the time and place fixed by the Sub-Divisional Officer. The voting shall be by show of hands. In case of equality of votes, the President shall have a second or casting vote.

4. Appointment of an Ad-hoc Committee in Certain Circumstances
(i) If there is any dispute in respect of the election of the members of the committee, the State Government may appoint an Ad-hoc Committee of Management pending the settlement of such dispute.
(ii) In case of continued mismanagement by the committee, the State Government may supersede the existing committee and appoint an Ad-hoc Committee till the election of a fresh committee.

5. Terms of Members
Every member of the committee shall hold office for a period of five years from the date of election and shall be eligible for re-election.

6. Filling of Vacancies
Any vacancy in the committee caused by death, resignation, or other causes shall be filled by the election of another person.

7. Validity of Proceedings
No act or proceeding of the committee shall be deemed invalid solely by reason of the existence of a vacancy in the committee or any defect or irregularity in the election of the President, Secretary, or any member of the committee.

8. Meetings
An ordinary meeting of the committee shall be held at least once every month. The Secretary shall send to every member of the committee at least seven days' notice of every ordinary meeting. The notice shall, as far as possible, set forth the business to be transacted at the meeting.
The President may, in case of emergency, call an emergent meeting at shorter notice.

9. Quorum
One third of the members shall form the quorum for a meeting. If in any meeting, a quorum is not present, the meeting shall be adjourned to a date to be fixed by the President. No quorum shall be necessary for any such adjourned meeting.

10. Manager
The Manager shall be appointed from amongst the persons holding qualifications prescribed by the State Government in consultation with the Registrar.

11. Appeals Against Orders of the Committee
The Manager or any other servant of a Goshala, who is aggrieved by the order of the committee in respect of his reduction in rank or discharge or other punishments, may appeal to the Registrar, whose decision in the matter shall be final.

12. Fixation of Scales of Pay
The scales of pay, leave, and other conditions of service of the Manager and other servants of a Goshala shall be determined by the Committee in consultation with the Registrar.

13. Skilled and Technical Management of Breeding Work
The skilled technical management of breeding work and segregation of such work from other activities of a Goshala and transfer of such work from urban to rural areas shall vest in the committee of the Goshala, which shall follow the directions issued in this behalf from time to time by the Director.

14. Forms for Maintenance of Records
Records relating to feeding, breeding, purchase, disposal, milk production, etc., of the animals belonging to the Goshala shall be maintained in the forms specified for the respective purpose in the schedule appended to these regulations.

15. Transfer of Breeding Bulls
The committee shall transport the breeding bulls from the Goshala to any other place for breeding purposes wherever and whenever directed to do so by the Director.

16. Manager’s Responsibility for Health of Animals
The Manager shall be responsible for the health of animals kept in the Goshala and shall maintain such records in this connection as directed by the Director from time to time.

17. Medical Treatment of Cattle
The Manager or any other servant of the Goshala, if trained in Animal Husbandry, may himself treat simple cases of animal disease. In other cases, the nearest Veterinary Surgeon may be called for advice and treatment.

18. Segregation of Cattle for Breeding Purposes
Animals considered suitable for breeding purposes shall be segregated from the other stock, as advised by the Director.

19. Vaccination of Animals
The Manager, unless he is a qualified Veterinary Surgeon, shall, in consultation with the nearest Veterinary Surgeon, make arrangements for inoculation, vaccination, and other means of protection of the animals of the Goshala to guard against contagious and other diseases.

Notification
Patna, the Agvina, 1880(s) October, 1958
No. M2-BA-020/58 A.H.
In exercise of the powers conferred by clause (b) of Regulation 1 of the Bihar Goshala Regulation, 1954, the Governor of Bihar is pleased to appoint the 1st November, 1958, as the date on which the said regulations, as amended by Notification No. M-2-RA-016/57 AH-6927 AH dated the 12th June, 1958, shall come into force.
By order of the Governor of Bihar,
Sd/- U. N. Rai,
Deputy Secretary to Government
Dated, 5th November, 1958.

Copy forwarded to the Secretary of all Goshalas in Bihar for immediate action.
Sd/- Illegible,
Goshala Development Officer, Bihar, Patna.

