BIHAR JALKAR MANAGEMENT (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2007

AN ACT TO AMEND THE BIHAR JALKAR MANAGEMENT ACT, 2006


Preamble:  
Whereas some discrepancies have been found in the implementation of the new scheme of settlement of Jalkars under the Bihar Jalkar Management Act, 2006, and it is necessary to clarify some provisions of the Act to increase the production of qualitative fish in Jalkars.

Be it enacted by the Legislators of the Republic of India as follows:

1. Short title, extent, and commencement:  
(i) This Act may be called the Bihar Jalkar Management (Amendment) Act, 2007.  
(ii) It shall extend to the whole of the state of Bihar.  
(iii) It shall come into force at once.

2. Amendment in Section 2 of Bihar Act 13, 2006:  
The following amendments shall be made in Section 2 of the Bihar Jalkar Management Act, 2006:  
(1) In Section 2(viii), the word “Professional” shall be substituted by the word “traditional”.  
(2) In Section 2(xii), the words “who is trained by Fisheries Department” shall be substituted by the words “trained by the Fisheries Department or fishermen having qualification of recognized courses in fisheries science”.  
(3) After Section 2(xiv) and 2(xv), the following notes shall be added:  
  - Note (i): The term of the representative of the Fishermen Cooperative Society and progressive fish farmers nominated shall be as fixed by the government or a maximum period of five years.  
  - Note (ii): In case the representative of the Fishermen Cooperative Society or progressive fish farmers are not nominated by the government, the Collector may nominate two non-government members to take part in the meeting of the Reserve Deposit Fixation Committee.

(4) After clause (xv) of Section 2, the following two clauses shall be added:  
  - (xvi) “Free jalkar” means the water area notified for free fishing by the government from time to time.  
  - (xvii) “Parta” means that Jalkar which has not been settled for any reason and that has been declared so by the prescribed procedure in Section 11 of the Act.

3. Amendment in Section 3 of Bihar Act 13, 2006:  
The following amendment shall be made in Section 3:  
(1) The following Proviso shall be added after Section 3(ii) of the said Act 2006:  
  - “Provided that the District Fisheries Officer shall publicize notice of proposed classification and invite objections on it, and shall dispose of them within a month before making the final classification.”

(2) The following new subsections (iii) and (iv) shall be added after subsection (ii) of Section 3 of the said Act, 13, 2006:  
  - (iii) The state government may issue an order in relation to the different categories of water bodies as to whether they shall be classified as Fine category, Medium category, or Low category.  
  - (iv) The state government may review the order issued under (iii) above, on the basis of the potential of production based on possible scientific fisheries development.

4. Amendment in Section 4 of the Bihar Act 13, 2006:  
Original sub-section (iv) of Section 4 of the said Act 13, 2006 shall be substituted by the following:  
  - (iv) The quorum of the Reserve Deposit Fixation Committee shall be by the presence of at least three members.

5. Amendment in Section 5 of the Bihar Act 13, 2006:  
The following amendments shall be made in Section 5:  
(1) In subsection (iii) of Section 5, after the words “Fishermen Cooperative Society”, the words “or other” shall be added.  
(2) After subsection (iii) of Section 5 of the said Act 13, 2006, the following new subsection (iv) shall be added:  
   (iv) Settlement of Jalkars in the state is to be aimed at maximizing fish production and productivity scientifically and increasing more and more avenues of employment for fisherfolk.

6. Amendment in Section 6 of the Bihar Act 13, 2006:  
The following clause (e) shall be added after clause (d) of subsection (vii) of Section 6 of the said Act, 2006:  
   (e) After cancellation of settlement for recovery of arrear amount, a Certificate case shall be filed by the District Fishery Officer, and settlement of this Jalkar shall be made under Section 7.

7. Amendment in Section 7 of the Bihar Act 13, 2006:  
The following amendments shall be made in Section 7 of the said Act, 2006:  
(1) In Section 7(i), the words “selected Jalkars for long-term settlement” shall be substituted by the words “selected Jalkars for long-term settlement selected Jalkar under Section 5 and notified Jalkar for Free Fishing by the state government”.

(2) Section 7(ii) shall be substituted by the following:  
  - (ii) The following shall be the Authority for approval of Short Term Settlement under any Fishermen Cooperative Society or other provisions of the Act:  
    - (a) The District Fisheries Officer for Jalkars of Annual Reserve Deposit up to One Lac rupees.  
    - (b) The Deputy Director of the range for Jalkars of Annual Reserve Deposit more than One Lac rupees up to Five Lac rupees.  
    (c) The Director Fisheries for all the Jalkars of Annual Reserve Deposit more than Five Lac rupees up to Twenty Lac rupees.  
     (d) The State government for Jalkars of Annual Reserve Deposit more than Twenty Lac rupees.

(3) The following Note shall be added after Section 7(iii)(a):  
   “Note – If due to non-appointment of an auditor by the Cooperative Department, the audit report is not ready, the Fishermen Cooperative Society may submit the audit report of a recognized Chartered Accountant.”

(4) The words “and proportion of Jalkars in their share” used in Section 7(iv) shall be deleted.  
(5) The word “eligible” shall be replaced by the word “desirous” and the following sentences shall be added in Section 7(viii):  
  - “Division of Jalkars shall be made with the self-consent of the society. In case of any dispute, the Reserve Deposit Fixation Committee may take any decision.”

(6) The last sentence of the proviso of Section 7(xii)(f): “Expenses incurred on registration shall be borne by the society” shall be deleted.

8. Amendment in Section 8 of the Bihar Act 13, 2006:  
The words “and the minimum number of members” used in Section 8(ii) shall be deleted.

9. Amendment in Section 11 of the Bihar Act 13, 2006:  
The words “two limited bids” used in Section 11 of the said Act, 2006 shall be substituted by the words “two open bids”.

10. Amendment of Section 13 of the Bihar Act 13, 2006:  
The following new subsection (vii) shall be added after subsection (vi) of Section 13 of the said Act 2006:  
  - (vii) Breeding and Transportation of Bighead and foreign Mangur and other prohibited fishes by the Ministry of Agriculture, Government of India from time to time will remain Prohibited.

11. Amendment of Section 16 of the Bihar Act 13, 2006:  
The words “Civil or Revenue Court” used in Section 16 of the said Act, 2006 shall be substituted by the words “any Civil Court, Court of Cooperative Registrar, and Revenue Court”.

12. Amendment of Section 17 of the Bihar Act 13, 2006:  
The brackets and figures “(i) to (v)” used in Section 17(ii) of the said Act, 2006 shall be substituted by the brackets, words, and figures “(i) to (v) and (vii)” respectively.

13. Amendment of Section 20 of the Bihar Act 13, 2006:  
Subsection (i) of Section 20 of the said Act, 2006 shall be substituted by the following:  
  - (i) All departmental rules, orders, and circulars issued in relation to the settlement of Jalkars     before the commencement of this Act are hereby repealed.
