Chapter I: Introductory
1. Short Title, Extent, and Commencement
Short Title: This Act may be called the Bihar Preservation and Improvement of Animals Act, 1955.
Extent: It extends to the whole of the State of Bihar.
Commencement:
This section shall come into force at once.
The remaining provisions of this Act, or any of them, shall come into force in any area on such date as the State Government may, by notification, appoint. Different dates may be appointed for different provisions and for different areas.
2. Definitions
In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context:
(a) "Animal" means:
(i) Bull, bullock, cow, heifer, buffalo, calf, sheep, goat, and any other ruminant animals.
(ii) Poultry.
(iii) Elephant, horse, camel, ass, mule, dog, swine, and such other domesticated animals as may be specified in this behalf by the State Government by notification in the official Gazette.
(b) "A person is said to keep a bull" if he owns the bull or has the bull in his possession or custody.
(c) "Bull" means an uncastrated male above the age of three years belonging to the species of bovine cattle.
(d) "Bullock" means a castrated male above the age of three years belonging to the species specified in clause (c).
(e) "Calf" means a female or a castrated or uncastrated male of the age of three years and below belonging to the species specified in clause (c).
(f) "Contagious disease" means rinderpest (that is to say, the disease commonly known as cattle plague, anthrax, haemorrhagic septicaemia, blackquarter, head and mouth disease, rabies, and includes such other diseases as may be declared by the State Government by notification in the official Gazette to be contagious diseases for the purpose of this Act.
(g) "Cow" means a female above the age of three years belonging to the species specified in clause (c), but does not include a she-buffalo.
(h) "Infected area" means an area in respect of which a notification under section 7 is in force.
(i) "Infective" used with reference to an animal means affected by a contagious disease.
(j) "Licence" means a licence granted under section 20.
(k) "Prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(l) "She-buffalo" means a female above the age of three years belonging to the species specified in clause (c), but it does not include a cow.
(m) "Veterinary Officer" means a veterinary assistant surgeon of the Bihar Civil Veterinary Department acting as such within the local limits of his jurisdiction and includes any officer appointed by the State Government to discharge all or any of the functions of a veterinary officer under this Act.
(n) "Director" means the Director of Animal Husbandry, Bihar, and includes any officer not below the rank of Deputy Director, Animal Husbandry, authorized by the State Government to discharge all or any of the functions of Director under this Act.
Chapter II: Prohibition of Slaughter of Cows, Calves, Bulls, and Bullocks
3. Prohibition of Slaughter of Cow, Calf, Bull, Bullock, or She-buffalo
Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force or in any usage or custom to the contrary, no person shall slaughter or cause to be slaughtered or offer or cause to be offered for slaughter a cow, calf, bull, bullock, or she-buffalo;
Provided that the prescribed authority may, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, allow the slaughter of:
(i) A bull or bullock which is over twenty-five years of age or which has become permanently incapable of breeding or yielding milk, if the permanent incapability has not been caused deliberately.
(ii) A she-buffalo which is over twenty-five years of age or which has become permanently incapable of breeding or yielding milk, if the permanent incapability has not been caused deliberately.
Provided further that the State Government may, by general or special order and subject to such conditions as it may think fit to impose, allow the slaughter of any such animal for any medicinal or research purpose.
4. Penalties
Whoever contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets the contravention of any of the provisions contained under section 3 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with a fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
Chapter II A: Ban on Export
4A. Ban on Export
No person shall export cows, she-buffaloes, calves, heifers, buffalo calves, buffalo-heifers, buffalo, bulls, and bullocks from the State of Bihar.
4B. Penalty
Whoever acts or is found to have been acting in contravention of the provisions of this Chapter may be arrested without any warrant by a police officer not below the rank of Assistant Sub-Inspector.
Whosoever contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets the contravention of the provisions of this Chapter shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with a fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
4C. Power to Make Rules
The Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules necessary to carry out the provisions of this Chapter.
4D. Power to Remove Difficulties
If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Chapter, the State Government may, when the occasion arises, by order do anything which appears necessary for the purpose of removing the difficulty.
Chapter III: Prevention and Control of Contagious Diseases Affecting Animals
5. Report of Contagious Disease
Every village chaukidar or daffardar or President appointed or elected under the Village Chaukidar Act, 1870 (Ben. Act VI of 1870) or the Bihar and Orissa Village Administration Act, 1922 (B. & O. Act III of 1922), every village policeman appointed under the Chota Nagpur Rural Police Act, 1914 (B. & O. Act I of 1914), every mukhia elected under the Bihar Panchayat Raj Act, 1947 (Bihar Act VII of 1948), and every veterinary practitioner attending any animal in the course of his veterinary practice or otherwise, who has reason to believe that such animal is infective, shall forthwith report, and every owner or person in charge or having control of an animal or any other person who has reason to believe that an animal is infective may report, the fact to the officer-in-charge of the nearest police station or the prescribed authority.
On receiving a report under sub-section (1), the officer-in-charge of the police station or the prescribed authority, as the case may be, shall, without delay, communicate such report to the nearest Veterinary Officer and forward a copy of the report to the District Officer-in-charge of the Veterinary Department. On receipt of the report, the Veterinary Officer shall proceed to the place where the animal is for the time being kept and examine the animal and inquire into the circumstances of the case.
Whenever a Veterinary Officer has reason to believe that the animal within his jurisdiction is infective, he shall proceed as soon as possible to the place where the animal is and examine it and inquire into the circumstances of the case, notwithstanding that no report under sub-section (2) in respect of such animal has been received by him.
If after the examination and inquiry referred to in sub-section (2) or sub-section (3), the Veterinary Officer is of the opinion that the animal is infective, he shall report the matter in the prescribed manner to the District Officer in charge of the Veterinary Department for such action as the latter may consider necessary and shall also take such further action including medical treatment of the animal concerned under the provisions of this Chapter as may be necessary or expedient and, at the same time, shall send a copy of such report to the Sub-divisional Magistrate.
6. Duty to Segregate Infective Animals
Every owner or person in charge or having control of an animal, who has reason to believe that such animal is infective, shall, as far as may be possible in the circumstances, segregate such animal in a place apart from all other animals that are not infective and shall take all possible steps to prevent any animal which is not infective from coming into contact with or approaching such animal.
7. Declaration of Infected Area
The State Government may, by notification published in the prescribed manner, declare any area in which any contagious disease has broken out or any area within which, in the opinion of the State Government, there is a danger of the spread of any such disease, to be an infected area.
Every notification under sub-section (1) shall specify the limits of the area which is declared to be an infected area.
The State Government may, by order, prohibit or restrict, in such manner and to such extent as it may think fit, the movement of animals or of persons from, into, or within any area declared to be an infected area under this section and may also by order prohibit the bringing into any market, fair, exhibition, or other concentration of animals, or the sale of or other traffic in, infective animals or their carcasses or their products, or parts of such products.
If any notification is issued under sub-section (1), the Veterinary Officer shall mark off the infected area with flags or with such other conspicuous objects as he may consider necessary and shall also give notice to the persons residing in the area by beating drums or in such other manner as may be prescribed, and shall forthwith send a copy of the notification to the officer-in-charge of every police station situated within the infected area.
8. Power to Remove Animals and Other Property from Infected Area
Any officer-in-charge of a police station may take such measures or give such directions as he may think fit to prevent the spread of any contagious disease beyond the limits of any infected area.
In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the officer-in-charge of a police station may direct or cause to be brought to such place as he may appoint any animal or other property from an infected area and may cause any animal to be sold or destroyed, and may dispose of or destroy any animal so removed as he may think fit.
No person shall remove any animal or other property from any infected area except in accordance with the directions of the officer-in-charge of the police station or of any other person lawfully exercising authority under this section.

Provisions for Infective Animals
9. Prohibition of Markets, Fairs, etc. in Infected Areas
No person shall organize, promote, or hold in any infected area any animal market, animal fair, animal exhibition, or other concentration of animals, whether for the purpose of sport or trade, without the written permission of the State Government.
10. Compulsory Segregation and Treatment of Animals
Segregation and Treatment Orders
(a) Where a Veterinary Officer, after due examination of an animal and necessary inquiry into the circumstances of the case, is of the opinion that such animal is infective, he may by order in writing direct the owner, person in charge, or person having control of such animal:
(i) to keep it where it is for the time being, or to remove it or allow it to be removed to a specified place of isolation or segregation.
(ii) to subject it to specified treatment; and such owner or person in charge shall comply with such order.
(b) If there is no person in charge or having control of the animal, and the owner is unknown or cannot be ascertained without undue delay, or if the order cannot be communicated to him without delay, or if the owner or person in charge fails to comply within a reasonable time, the Veterinary Officer shall seize the animal and remove it to a place of isolation or segregation and may subject it to necessary treatment.
Release and Expenses
(a) If the owner of the seized animal or his authorized agent applies in the prescribed manner for its release, the animal shall be released if the owner or authorized agent pays the prescribed expenses incurred for the animal's upkeep up to the release date.
(b) Upon release, the owner or his authorized agent shall comply with any further order deemed fit by the Veterinary Officer.
Disposal of Non-Claimed Animals
If the owner of the seized animal or his authorized agent does not apply for its release and the Veterinary Officer deems the animal no longer likely to infect others, the Veterinary Officer shall send the animal to the nearest cattle pound or deal with it in such other manner as may be prescribed.
11. Disinfection of Buildings, etc.
Subject to prescribed rules, the Veterinary Officer may, by order in writing, require the owner, occupier, or person in charge of any building, yard, vessel, or vehicle in which an infective animal has been kept, to have such building, yard, vehicle, or vessel disinfected or dealt with in a specified manner and extent. The owner, occupier, or person in charge shall comply with this order.
12. Power of Veterinary Officer to Subject Infective Animals to Tests
If the Veterinary Officer suspects an animal to be infective, he may subject it to prescribed tests. The owner or person in charge of the animal shall provide every facility and assistance to the Veterinary Officer for conducting these tests.
13. Power of Veterinary Officer to Carry Out Post-Mortem Examination
Subject to prescribed rules, the Veterinary Officer may carry out or cause to be carried out a post-mortem examination of any animal that was infective or suspected to have been infective at the time of its death. The Veterinary Officer may also cause the carcass of such an animal to be exhumed for this purpose.
14. Prohibition of Sale or Transfer of Infective Animals
Whoever sells or transfers, or attempts to sell or transfer, any animal which he knows or has reason to believe to be infective shall be punished with a fine which may extend to fifty rupees for a first conviction and to one hundred rupees for a second or subsequent conviction.
Provisions for Bulls
24. Inspection of Bulls
The Veterinary Officer may, by order, require any person keeping a bull to submit it for inspection at any reasonable hour. This inspection can be carried out either by the Veterinary Officer himself or by an officer or person deputed by him. The inspection can take place at the place where the bull is kept or any other suitable location specified in the order. It is the duty of the person keeping the bull to submit it for inspection and to provide all reasonable assistance during the inspection.
25. Power to Order Castration
Castration Orders
The Veterinary Officer may, by order, require any person keeping a bull, which has attained the prescribed age and for which there is no valid license, to have it castrated in the manner specified in the order within one month from the date of service of the order.
Castration Cost
The castration shall be performed or caused to be performed by the Veterinary Officer free of charge unless the person keeping the bull chooses to make their own arrangements.
Non-Compliance
If the person keeping the bull fails to comply with the order within the specified time, the Veterinary Officer shall arrange for the bull to be castrated free of charge.
26. Production of Licence
A person keeping a bull, in respect of which a license has been granted and is in force, must produce such license within a reasonable time at any place where the bull is kept upon demand by the Veterinary Officer.
27. Power of Veterinary Officer to Castrate Bulls
Seizure and Castration
If the Veterinary Officer is unable to ascertain the owner of a bull after an inquiry or otherwise, he may seize the bull. If the bull has attained the prescribed age and is unsuitable for breeding as specified in section 21, the Veterinary Officer may cause the bull to be castrated and marked free of charge.
Disposal of Seized Bulls
Every seized bull, after castration and marking (if necessary), shall be sent to a Pinjrapole or infirmary recognized by the State Government or sold by public auction. The proceeds from the sale, after deducting the cost of maintenance and sale arrangements, shall be credited to the Consolidated Fund of the State.
Owner’s Claim
If the owner appears before the Veterinary Officer within the prescribed time and proves ownership:
(i) If the bull has been sold, the proceeds shall be paid to the owner after deducting costs.
(ii) In other cases, the bull shall be delivered to the owner on payment of maintenance costs.
Note: The owner is not entitled to any compensation if the bull dies before sale or delivery.
28. Power of Veterinary Officer to Inspect or Mark Bulls
For the purposes of this Chapter, a Veterinary Officer or any authorized person shall have the power at reasonable times to:
(a) Inspect any bull.
(b) Mark any bull free of charge with a prescribed mark in the prescribed manner.
29. Penalty for Contravention
If a person:
(a) Keeps a bull in contravention of this Chapter, any rules made under this Act, or any terms or conditions of a license;
(b) Neglects or fails to submit a bull for inspection as required under section 24;
(c) Obstructs or resists the castration of a bull as required under section 25;
(d) Neglects or fails to produce a license as required under section 26;
He shall be punishable with a fine extending to twenty-five rupees for a first offence, and to fifty rupees for a second or subsequent offence.
Explanation: “Person” includes the authorities of any institution keeping a bull.
30. Exemption for Bulls Dedicated to Religious Purposes
Religious Bulls Exemption
Nothing in this Chapter applies to a bull dedicated in good faith to a religious purpose according to any religious usage or custom, provided the bull belongs to the prescribed breed and is approved by the prescribed authority.
Castration of Religious Bulls
The Veterinary Officer may, if he believes that the provisions of section 21 apply to any bull, cause such bull to be castrated or removed to a prescribed place.

Miscellaneous Provisions
31. Duty of Officers to Report Offences
It is the duty of all persons entrusted with duties under this Act, including officers of the Veterinary, Agriculture, Co-operative, and Revenue Departments, Gram Panchayats, and Police Officers (including chaukidars and dafadars), to:
(a) Report Offences: Immediately inform the nearest Veterinary Officer or police station of any offence or intention to commit an offence under this Act.
(b) Prevent Offences: Take all possible measures to prevent the commission of any known or suspected offence.
(c) Assist in Implementation: Assist any Veterinary Officer or other authorized person in carrying out the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder.
32. Power to Enter and Inspect Land, Premises, etc.
Inspection Authority
Subject to prescribed rules, a Veterinary Officer or an authorized person shall have the power to enter and inspect any land, premises, yard, building, vessel, or vehicle to exercise powers and perform duties under this Act.
Access and Cooperation
Occupants of such land, premises, or vehicles must allow the officer access and answer questions to the best of their knowledge or belief.
33. Officers to be Public Servants
All Veterinary Officers, officers authorized by them, and persons performing duties under this Act shall be deemed public servants under section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (XLV of 1860).
34. Delegation of Functions
The State Government may, by notification, delegate any of its powers or functions under sections 5, 7, and 9 to any officer of the State Government.
35. Protection of Persons Acting in Good Faith
Legal Immunity
No suit, prosecution, or legal proceeding shall be against any servant of the State Government or any person for actions done in good faith under this Act or its rules.
Sanction Requirement
No legal proceeding shall lie against any servant of the State Government or local authority under this Act without prior sanction from the State Government or local authority.
36. Offences to be Cognizable
Notwithstanding the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (V of 1898), an offence under Chapter II shall be cognizable.
37. Cognizance of Offences
No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act unless a complaint is made by or under the order of the prescribed authority.
38. Power to Make Rules
Rule-Making Authority
The State Government may, after previous publication, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Specific Provisions
The rules may provide for:
(i) The manner of reporting under section 5.
(ii) The publication of notifications under section 7.
(iii) Vaccination and marking of animals under section 8.
(iv) Applications under section 10.
(v) Calculation of expenses under section 10.
(vi) Orders by Veterinary Officers under section 11.
(vii) Tests under section 12.
(viii) Post-mortem examinations under section 13.
(ix) Dealing with animals under section 19.
(x) Enumeration of contagious diseases under section 19.
(xi) Appeals under section 22.
(xii) Procedures and fees for appeals under section 22.
(xiii) Prescribing bull breeds and approval authority under section 30.
(xiv) Powers and procedures under section 32.
(xv) Issuance of duplicate licenses and associated fees.
(xvi) Powers and duties of appointed officers.
(xvii) Service of notices and orders.
(xviii) Any other matters required or allowed by this Act.
Penalties
Breaches of rules may be punishable with a fine extending to fifty rupees.

