No.11-3/83-STU
Government of India
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
(Department of Agriculture and Cooperation)
New Delhi, dated 25th September 1985
THE FERTILISER (CONTROL) ORDER 1985
ORDER
G.S.R. 758 (E). In exercise of the powers conferred by section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 (10 of 1955), the Central Government hereby makes the following Order, namely:
1. Short Title and Commencement
This Order may be called the Fertiliser (Control) Order, 1985.
It shall come into force on the date of its publication in the Official Gazette.
2. Definitions
In this Order, unless the context otherwise requires:
(a) "Act" means the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 (10 of 1955).
(aa) "Biofertiliser" means the product containing carrier-based (solid or liquid) living microorganisms which are agriculturally useful in terms of nitrogen fixation, phosphorus solubilisation, or nutrient mobilization, to increase the productivity of the soil and/or crop.
(b) "Certificate of Source" means a certificate given by a State Government, Commodity Board, manufacturer, importer, pool handling agency, or, as the case may be, wholesale dealer indicating the source from which fertiliser for the purpose of sale is obtained.
(c) "Commodity Board" means the Coffee Board constituted under section 4 of the Coffee Act, 1942 (7 of 1942), or the Rubber Board constituted under section 4 of the Rubber Act, 1947 (24 of 1947), or the Tea Board constituted under section 4 of the Tea Act, 1953 (29 of 1953), or, as the case may be, the Cardamom Board constituted under section 4 of the Cardamom Act, 1965 (42 of 1965).
(d) "Compound or Complex Fertiliser" means a fertiliser containing two or more nutrients during the production of which chemical reaction takes place.
(e) "Controller" means the person appointed as Controller of Fertilisers by the Central Government and includes any other person empowered by the Central Government to exercise or perform all or any of the powers, or, as the case may be, functions of the Controller under this Order.
(ee) “Customised Fertiliser” means the fertiliser specified under clause 20 B.
(f) "Dealer" means a person carrying on the business of selling fertilisers whether wholesale or retail or industrial use, and includes a manufacturer, importer, and a pool handling agency carrying on such business and the agents of such person, manufacturer, importer or pool handling agency.
(g) "Fertiliser" means any substance used or intended to be used as a fertiliser of the soil and/or crop and specified in Part A of Schedule I and includes a mixture of fertiliser and special mixture of fertilisers, provisional fertiliser, customised fertiliser, Bio-fertilizers specified in Schedule III, and Organic fertilisers specified in Schedule IV.
(h) "Form" means a form appended to this Order.
(i) "Grade" means the nutrient element contents in the fertiliser expressed in percentage.
(j) "Granulated Mixture" means a mixture of fertilisers made by intimately mixing two or more fertilisers with or without inert material, and granulating them together, without involving any chemical reaction.
(Kk) “Importer" means a person who imports fertiliser in accordance with the Export and Import Policy of the Central Government, as amended from time to time.
(k) "Inspector" means an Inspector of Fertilisers appointed under clause 27.
(ll) "Industrial Dealer" means a dealer who sells fertilisers for industrial purposes.
(lll) "Industrial Purposes" means the use of fertiliser for purposes other than fertilisation of soil and increasing productivity of crops.
(m) "Manufacturer" means a person who produces fertilisers or mixtures of fertilisers and the expression "manufacture" with its grammatical variations shall be construed accordingly.
(n) "Mixture of Fertilisers" means a mixture of fertilisers made by physically mixing two or more fertilisers with or without inert material in physical or granular form and includes a mixture of NPK fertilisers, a mixture of micronutrient fertilisers, and a mixture of NPK with micronutrient fertilisers.
(nn) "Notified Authority" means an authority appointed under clause 26 A.
(o) "Offer for Sale" includes a reference to an intimation by a person of a proposal by him for the sale of any fertiliser, made by publication of a price list, by exposing the fertiliser for sale indicating the price, by furnishing of a quotation or otherwise howsoever.
(pp) “Provisional Fertiliser” means fertiliser specified under clause 20 A.
(q) "Prescribed Standard" means: i. In relation to a fertiliser included in column 1 of Part A of Schedule-I, the standard set out in the corresponding entry in column 2, subject to the limits of permissible variation as specified in Part B of that Schedule; ii. In relation to a mixture of fertilisers, the standard set out in respect of that mixture under sub-clause (1) of clause 13 by the Central Government, subject to the limits of permissible variation as specified in Part B of Schedule-I; iii. In relation to a mixture of fertilisers, the standard set out in respect of that mixture under sub-clause (2) of clause 13 by the State Government, subject to limits of permissible variation as specified in Part B of Schedule-I; iv. In relation to a Biofertiliser included in column 1 of Part A of Schedule-III, the standard set out in the corresponding entry in column 2, subject to the limits of permissible variation as specified in Part B of that Schedule; v. In relation to an Organic fertiliser included in column 1 of Part A of Schedule-IV, the standard set out in the corresponding entry in column 2, subject to the limits of permissible variation as specified in Part B of that Schedule.
(r) "Pool Handling Agency" means an agency entrusted by the Central Government with functions relating to handling and distribution of imported fertilisers.
(s) "Registering Authority" means a registering authority appointed under clause 26 in respect of mixture of fertilisers and special mixture of fertilisers.
(t) "Retail Dealer" means a dealer who sells fertilisers to farmers or plantations for agricultural use such as for fertilisation of soil and increasing productivity of crops.
(u) "Schedule" means a Schedule appended to this Order.
(v) "Special Mixture of Fertilisers" means any mixture of fertilisers prepared for experimental purposes in pursuance of a requisition made by any person (including a person engaged in the cultivation of tea, coffee or rubber) for sale to that person in such quantity and within such period as may be specified in such requisition.
(w) "Wholesale Dealer" means a dealer who sells fertilisers otherwise than in retail—for agricultural use such as for fertilisation of soil and increasing productivity of crops.
II. PRICE CONTROL
3. Fixation of Prices of Fertilisers
The Central Government may, with a view to regulating equitable distribution of fertilisers and making fertilisers available at fair prices, by notification in the Official Gazette, fix the maximum prices or rates at which any fertiliser may be sold by a dealer, manufacturer, importer, or a pool handling agency.
The Central Government may, having regard to the local conditions of any area, the period of storage of fertilisers and other relevant circumstances, fix different prices or rates for fertilisers having different periods of storage or for different areas or for different classes of consumers.
No dealer, manufacturer, importer, or pool handling agency shall sell or offer for sale any fertiliser at a price exceeding the maximum price or rate fixed under this clause.
4. Display of Stock Position and Price List of Fertilisers
Every dealer, who makes or offers to make a retail sale of any fertilisers, shall prominently display in his place of business:
a. The quantities of opening stock of different fertilisers held by him on each day;
Explanation: The actual stocks at any point of time during the day may be different from that of the displayed opening stocks to the extent of sale and receipt of such fertilisers up to the time of inspection during that day.
b. A list of prices or rates of such fertilisers fixed under clause 3 and for the time being in force.
5. Issue of Cash/Credit Memorandum
a. Every dealer shall issue a cash or credit memorandum to a purchaser of a fertiliser in Form M.

III. CONTROL ON DISTRIBUTION OF FERTILISERS BY MANUFACTURER/IMPORTER
6. Allocation of Fertilisers to Various States
The Central Government may, with a view to securing equitable distribution and availability of fertilisers to the farmers in time, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct any manufacturer/importer to sell the fertilisers produced by him in such quantities and in such State or States and within such period as may be specified in the said notification.

IV. AUTHORISATION OR REGISTRATION OF DEALERS
7. Registration of Industrial Dealers and Authorisation of Other Dealers
No person shall sell, offer for sale or carry on the business of selling of fertiliser at any place as wholesale dealer or retail dealer except under and in accordance with clause 8: Provided that a State Government may, if it considers it necessary or expedient, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt from the provisions of this clause any person selling fertiliser to farmers in such areas and subject to such conditions as may be specified in that notification.
8. Application for Intimation or Registration
Every person intending to sell or offer for sale or carrying on the business of selling of fertiliser as Industrial Dealer shall obtain a certificate of registration from the Controller by making an application in Form A together with the fee prescribed under clause 36 and a Certificate of Source in Form O.
Every person including a manufacturer, an importer, a pool handling agency, wholesaler, and a retail dealer intending to sell or offer for sale or carrying on the business of selling of fertiliser shall make a Memorandum of Intimation to the Notified Authority, in Form A1 duly filled in, in duplicate, together with the fee prescribed under clause 36 and Certificate of Source in Form O.
On receipt of a Memorandum of Intimation, complete in all respects, the Notified Authority shall issue an acknowledgment of receipt in Form A2 and it shall be deemed to be an authorisation letter granted and the concerned person as an authorised dealer for the purposes of this Order.
Provided that a certificate of registration granted before the commencement of the Fertiliser (Control) Amendment Order, 2003, shall be deemed to be an authorisation letter granted under the provisions of this Order.
Provided further that where the applicant is a State Government, a manufacturer or an importer or a pool-handling agency, it shall not be necessary for it or him to submit Form O.
Provided also that a separate Memorandum of Intimation shall be submitted by an applicant for wholesale business or retail dealership, as the case may be.
Provided also that where fertilisers are obtained for sale from different sources, a certificate of source from each such source shall be furnished in Form O.
9. Grant or Refusal of Certificate of Registration
The Controller shall grant a certificate of registration in Form 'B’ within thirty days of the receipt of application to any person who applies for it under clause 8;
Provided that no certificate of registration shall be granted to a person:
a. If his previous certificate of registration is under suspension; or
b. If his previous certificate of registration has been cancelled within a period of one year immediately preceding the date of application; or
c. If he has been convicted of an offence under the Act, or any Order made thereunder within three years immediately preceding the date of making the application; or
d. If he fails to enclose with the application a certificate of source; or
e. If the application is incomplete in any respect; or
f. If he makes an application for obtaining the certificate of registration for industrial dealer and, excepting if he is a manufacturer, importer, or pool handling agency, holds [an authorisation letter] for wholesale dealer or retail dealer or both, and as the case may be, the vice-versa.
10. Period of Validity of Certificate of Registration and Letter of Authorisation
Every certificate of registration granted under clause 9 and every authorisation letter issued under clause 8 shall, unless renewed, suspended or cancelled, be valid for a period of three years from the date of its issue.
11. Renewal of Certificates of Registration and Authorisation Letters
Every holder of a certificate of registration granted under clause 9 or authorisation letter granted or deemed to have been granted under clause 8, desiring to renew such certificate or authorisation letter shall, before the date of expiry of such certificate of registration or authorisation letter, as the case may be, make an application for renewal to the Controller, in Form C, or to the Notified Authority in Form A1, respectively, in duplicate, together with the fee prescribed under clause 36 for such renewal and a certificate of source as required under clause 8.
On receipt of an application under sub-clause (1), together with such fee and certificate of source, the Controller may renew the certificate of registration or the Notified Authority, as the case may be, shall issue an acknowledgement receipt of renewal in Form A2.
Provided that a certificate of registration shall not be renewed if the holder of the same did not sell any fertiliser during the period of one year immediately preceding the date of expiry of the period of validity.
If any application for renewal is not made before the expiry of the period of validity of the certificate of registration or, as the case may be, the authorisation letter but is made within one month from the date of such expiry, the certificate of registration or, as the case may be, the authorisation letter shall be dealt with as provided in sub-clause (2) on payment of such additional fee as may be prescribed under clause 36 in addition to the fee for renewal.
Where the application for renewal of certificate of registration is made within the time specified in sub-clause (1) or sub-clause (3), the applicant shall be deemed to have held a valid certificate of registration until such date as the Controller passes orders on the application for renewal.
If an application for renewal of a certificate of registration or authorisation letter is not made within one month from the date of expiry of their period of validity, the same shall be deemed to have lapsed on the date on which its validity expired and any business carried on after that date shall be deemed to have been carried on in contravention of clause 7.

 
 
V. MANUFACTURE OF MIXTURES OF FERTILIZERS, ORGANIC FERTILIZER, AND BIO-FERTILIZER
12. Restriction on Preparation of Mixtures of Fertilizer
No person shall carry on the business of preparing any mixture of fertilizers, or special mixture of fertilizers, Bio-fertilizers or Organic fertilizers except under and in accordance with the terms and conditions of a certificate of manufacture granted to him under clauses 15 or 16.
13. Standards of Mixtures of Fertilizers
Subject to the other provisions of the order:
(a) No person shall manufacture any mixture of fertilizers, whether of solid or liquid fertilizers specified in Part A of Schedule I unless such mixture conforms to the standards set out in the notification to be issued by the Central Government in the Official Gazette;
(b) No person shall manufacture any biofertilizer unless such biofertilizer conforms to the standards set out in Part A of Schedule III;
(c) No person shall manufacture any Organic fertilizer unless such organic fertilizer conforms to the standards set out in Part A of Schedule IV.
Subject to the other provisions of this order, no person shall manufacture any mixture of fertilizers unless such mixture conforms to the standards set out in the notification to be issued by the State Government in the Official Gazette.
Explanation: For the purposes of this sub-clause, mixture of fertilizers shall not include liquid fertilizers and 100% water soluble fertilizers, containing N, P, K.
[Omitted]
No Certificate of Manufacture shall be granted in respect of any fertilizer which does not conform to the standards set out in the notification referred to in sub-clause (1) or (2);
Nothing in this clause shall apply to special mixtures of fertilizers.
14. Application for Certificate of Manufacture of Mixtures of Fertilizers
Every person desiring to obtain a certificate of manufacture for preparation of any mixture of fertilizers or special mixture of fertilizers shall possess such mixture, and possess the minimum laboratory facility as specified in clause 21A of this Order.
An applicant for a certificate of manufacture for preparation of mixture of fertilizers or special mixture of fertilizers shall make an application to the registering authority:
(a) If he is an applicant for a certificate of manufacture for any mixture of fertilizers in Form D, in duplicate, together with the fee prescribed therefor under clause 36; or
(b) If he is an applicant for a certificate of manufacture for any special mixture, in Form E, in duplicate, together with the fee prescribed therefor under the said clause 36 and an attested copy of the requisition of the purchaser.
Every person desiring to obtain a Certificate of Manufacture for preparation of organic fertilizer or biofertilizer shall make an application in Form D, in duplicate, together with a fee prescribed therefor under clause 36, to the Registering Authority.
15. Grant or Refusal of Certificate of Manufacture for Preparation of Mixtures of Fertilizers, Biofertilizers, or Organic Fertilizer
On receipt of an application under clause 14, the registering authority shall, by order in writing, either grant or refuse to grant the certificate of manufacture in respect of any mixture of fertilizer, Biofertilizer, Organic fertilizer, or special mixture of fertilizer and shall, within forty-five days from the date of receipt of the application, furnish to the applicant a copy of the order so passed.
Where an application for a certificate of manufacture for mixture of fertilizers, Biofertilizer, Organic fertilizer is not refused under sub-clause (1), the registering authority shall grant a certificate of manufacture in Form F and where an application for a certificate of manufacture for a special mixture is not refused under that sub-clause, [such authority shall within forty-five days from the date of receipt of the application] grant a certificate of manufacture to the applicant in Form G.
16. Conditions for Grant of Certificate of Manufacture in Respect of Special Mixture of Fertilizers and Period of Validity of Such Certificate
No certificate of manufacture in respect of any special mixture of fertilizers shall be granted to an applicant unless he holds a valid certificate of manufacture under this Order for any mixture of fertilizers.
Every certificate of manufacture granted in respect of any special mixture of fertilizers shall be valid for a period of [six months] from the date of its issue; Provided that the registering authority may, if it is satisfied that it is necessary so to do, extend the said period to such further period or periods as it may deem fit, so however, that the total period or periods so extended shall not exceed [twelve months].
17. Period of Validity of a Certificate of Manufacture for Preparation of Mixtures of Fertilizers, Biofertilizers, or Organic Fertilizer
Every certificate of manufacture granted under clause 15 for preparation of a mixture of fertilizers, Biofertilizer or Organic fertilizers shall, unless suspended or cancelled, be valid for a period of three years from the date of issue.
18. Renewal of Certificate of Manufacture for Preparation of Mixtures of Fertilizers, Biofertilizer or Organic Fertilizer
Every holder of a certificate of manufacture for preparation of a mixture of fertilizers, Biofertilizer, Organic fertilizer desiring to renew the certificate, shall, before the date of expiry of the said certificate of manufacture, make an application to the registering authority in Form D in duplicate, together with the fee prescribed for this purpose under clause 36.
On receipt of an application for renewal as provided in sub-clause (1), and keeping in view the performance of the applicant and other relevant circumstances, the registering authority may, if he so decides, renew the [certificate of manufacture by endorsement on Form F and in case the certificate of registration is not renewed, the registering authority shall record in writing his reasons for not renewing the certificate of manufacture.
If an application for renewal is not made before the expiry of the certificate of manufacture but is made within one month from the date of expiry of the [certificate of manufacture, the certificate of manufacture] may be renewed on payment of such additional fee as may be prescribed by the State Government for this purpose.
Where the application for renewal is made within the time specified in sub-clause (1) or sub-clause (3), the applicant shall be deemed to have held a valid [certificate of manufacture] until such date as the registering authority passes an order on the application for renewal.
If an application for renewal of a certificate of manufacture is not made within the period stipulated under sub-clause (1) or, as the case may be, under sub-clause (3), the certificate of manufacture shall be deemed to have expired immediately on the expiry of its validity period, and any business carried on after that date shall be deemed to have been carried on in contravention of clause 12.
VI. RESTRICTIONS ON MANUFACTURE/ IMPORT, SALE, ETC. OF FERTILIZER
19. Restriction on Manufacture/Import, Sale and Distribution of Fertilizers
No person shall himself or by any other person on his behalf:
(a) Manufacture/import for sale, sell, offer for sale, stock or exhibit for sale or distribute any fertilizer which is not of prescribed standard;
(b) Manufacture/import for sale, sell, offer for sale, stock or exhibit for sale, or distribute any mixture of fertilizers which is not of prescribed standard** (subject to such limits of permissible variation as may be specified from time to time by the Central Government) or special mixture of fertilizers which does not conform to the particulars specified in the certificate of manufacture granted to him under this Order in respect of such special mixture;
(c) Sell, offer for sale, stock or exhibit for sale or distribute:
(i) Any fertilizer the container whereof is not packed and marked in the manner laid down in this Order;
(ii) Any fertilizer which is an [imitation of or] a substitute for another fertilizer under the name of which it is sold;
(iii) Any fertilizer which is adulterated; Explanation: A fertilizer shall be deemed to be adulterated if it contains any substance the addition of which is likely to eliminate or decrease its nutrient contents or make the fertilizer not conforming to the prescribed standard.
(iv) Any fertilizer the label or container whereof bears the name of any individual firm or company purporting to be manufacturer/importer of the fertilizer, which individual, firm or company is fictitious or does not exist;
(v) Any fertilizer, the label or container whereof or anything accompanying therewith bears any statement which makes a false claim for the fertilizer or which is false or misleading in any material particular;
(vi) Any substance as a fertilizer which substance is not, in fact, a fertilizer; or
(vii) Any fertilizer without exhibiting the minimum guaranteed percentage by weight of plant nutrient.
20. Specifications in Respect of Imported Fertilizers
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Order, the Central Government may by an order, published in the Official Gazette, fix separate specifications in respect of imported fertilizers.
20 A. Specification in Respect of Provisional Fertilizer
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Order, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, notify specifications, valid for a period not exceeding three years, in respect of fertilizers to be manufactured by any manufacturing unit for conducting commercial trials.
20 B. Specifications in Respect of Customized Fertilizers
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Order, the Central Government may by order published in the Official Gazette, notify specifications, valid for a period not exceeding three years, in respect of customized fertilizer to be manufactured by any manufacturing unit.
21. Manufacturers/Importers Pool Handling Agencies to Comply with Certain Requirements in Regard to Packing and Marking, Etc.
Every manufacturer/importer and pool handling agency shall, in regard to packing and marking of containers of fertilizers, Biofertilizer, or Organic fertilizer, comply with the following requirements:
(a) Every container in which any fertilizer is packed shall conspicuously be superscribed with the word “FERTILIZER” and shall bear only such particulars and unless otherwise required under any law nothing else, as may from time to time, be specified by the Controller in this behalf;
(aa) Every container in which any Biofertilizer or Organic fertilizer is packed shall conspicuously be superscribed with the word “BIO-FERTILIZER/ ORGANIC FERTILIZER” and shall bear only such particulars and unless otherwise required under any law nothing else, as may from time to time, be specified by the Controller in this behalf.
Provided that in case of containers the gross weight of which is 5 kg or less, no such printing of superscription and other particulars shall be necessary if such superscription and other particulars are printed on a separate label which is securely affixed to such container.
(b) Every container shall be so packed and sealed that the contents thereof cannot be tampered with without breaking the seal; Provided that where fertilizer manufactured in India are packed in bags stitched by hand, such bags shall bear lead seals, so that the contents thereof cannot be tampered with without breaking the seals; Provided further that lead sealing shall not be necessary:
(i) If such bags are machine stitched in such a manner that contents thereof cannot be tampered with without a visible break in the stitching; and
(ii) In the case of fertilizers imported from abroad and packed in bags stitched by hand, in such a manner that the contents thereof cannot be tampered with without visible break in the stitching. Provided also that in case fertilizer bags are in cut, torn or damaged condition during transportation or mishandling during loading or unloading operation, the manufacturer of such fertilizer may, under intimation to the State Government and the Central Government, repack the fertilizer in new bags or restandardize the quantity in terms of declared weight.
(c) Every fertilizer bag in which any fertilizer is packed for sale shall be of such weight and size as may be specified by the Central Government from time to time in this behalf.
21 A. Manufacturers to Comply with Certain Requirements for Laboratory Facilities
Every manufacturer shall, in order to ensure quality of their product, possess minimum laboratory facilities, as may be specified from time to time by the Controller.
22. Bulk Sale of Fertilizers
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Order:
(a) A retail dealer may retain at any time one bag or container of each variety of fertilizer in an open and unsealed condition for the purpose of sale;
(b) A manufacturer/importer may sell the fertilizer manufactured/imported by him in bulk to a manufacturer of mixture of fertilizers, compound/complex fertilizers, or special mixture of fertilizers; and
(c) The Central Government may by notification published in the Official Gazette in this behalf authorize a manufacturer/importer to sell any fertilizer manufactured/imported by him in bulk also directly to farmers for such period as may be specified in that notification: Provided that a certificate indicating the minimum guaranteed percentage of plant nutrients is issued by the manufacturer/importer to each farmer at the time of such sale.

 
23. Disposal of Non-Standard Fertilizers
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Order, a person may sell, offer for sale, stock or exhibit for sale, or distribute any fertilizer (except any fertilizer imported by the Central Government) which, not being an adulterated fertilizer, does not conform to the prescribed standard (hereinafter referred to as non-standard fertilizer), subject to the conditions that:
(a) The container of such non-standard fertilizer is conspicuously superscribed in red color with the words "non-standard" and also with the sign "X"; and
(b) An application for the disposal of non-standard fertilizers in Form H is submitted to the [Notified Authority] to grant a certificate of authorization for sale of such fertilizers and a certificate of authorization with regard to their disposal and price is obtained in Form I.
(c) Such non-standard fertilizer shall be sold only to the manufacturers of mixtures of fertilizers or special mixtures of fertilizers, or research farms of Government or Universities, or such bodies.
The price per unit of the non-standard fertilizer shall be fixed by the [Notified Authority] after satisfying itself that the sample taken is a representative one, and after considering the nutrient contents in the sample determined on the basis of a chemical analysis of the non-standard fertilizer.
The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette and subject to the conditions, if any, laid down in that notification, and subject to guidelines issued in this regard by the Central Government, exempt such pool handling agencies as it deems fit from complying with conditions laid down in paragraphs (a) and (b) of sub-clause (1).
Where any fertilizer imported by the Central Government is found to be non-standard and the Central Government decides that the fertilizer cannot be permitted for direct use in agriculture, it may permit the use of such fertilizer by manufacturers of complex fertilizers, mixtures of fertilizers, or special mixtures of fertilizers to be sold at such price as may be fixed by the Central Government.
If a manufacturer or importer detects or has reasonable doubt about the standard of the fertilizer manufactured or imported by him, and dispatched for sale as deteriorated in quality during transit due to natural calamity and is not of the prescribed standards, he may, within fifteen days from the date of dispatch from factory or port, apply with detailed justifications to the Central Government for obtaining permission for reprocessing the same in a factory to meet the prescribed standards. The Central Government may, after considering the facts, permit the re-processing of such fertilizer on the terms and conditions as may be notified by the Central Government in this behalf.
Provided that no such application for permission to reprocess the fertilizer by the manufacturer or importer shall be accepted by the Central Government after the expiry of the said period of fifteen days.
24. Manufacturers/Pool Handling Agencies to Appoint Officers Responsible for Compliance with the Order
Every manufacturing organization, importer, and pool handling agency shall appoint, in consultation with the Central Government, an officer who shall be responsible for compliance with the provisions of this Order.
25. Restriction on Sale/Use of Fertilizers
No person shall, except with the prior permission of the Central Government and subject to such terms and conditions as may be imposed by such Government, sell or use fertilizer for purposes other than fertilization of soils and increasing productivity of crops.
Provided that the price of fertilizers permitted for sale for industrial use shall be no profit no loss price, excluding all subsidies at the production, import, handling or on sale for agricultural consumers;
Provided further that wherever customs or excise duties are chargeable, these may be added to the price so fixed.
Provided also that in the case of non-standard fertilizers, reductions shall be made from the no profit no loss price, indicated above, proportionate to the loss of nutrient contents.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-clause (1), no prior permission for the use of fertilizer for industrial purposes shall be necessary when the fertilizer for such purposes is purchased from the industrial dealer possessing a valid certificate of registration granted under clause 9.
Any person possessing a valid certificate of registration for Industrial Dealer, unless such person is a State Government, a manufacturer/importer, or a pool handling agency, shall not carry on the business of selling fertilizers for agricultural purposes, including a wholesale dealer or a retail dealer. However, in the case of a State Government, a manufacturer or an importer or a pool handling agency possessing a valid certificate of registration for sale of fertilizer for industrial use, and also for sale of fertilizer for agricultural use, whether in wholesale or retail or both, shall not carry on the business of selling fertilizers both for industrial use and agricultural use in the same premises.
VII. ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITIES
26. Appointment of Registering Authority
The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint such number of persons as it thinks necessary to be registering authorities for the purpose of this Order [ $] for industrial dealers, and may, in any such notification, define the limits of local area within which each such registering authority shall exercise his jurisdiction.
26A. Notified Authority
The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint such number of persons as it thinks necessary to be Notified Authorities for the purpose of this Order and define the local limits within which each such Notified Authority shall exercise his jurisdiction.
27. Appointment of Inspectors
The State Government or the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint such number of persons as it thinks necessary to be inspectors of fertilizers for the purpose of this Order, and may, in any such notification, define the limits of local area within which each such inspector shall exercise his jurisdiction.
27A. Qualifications for Appointment of Fertilizer Inspectors
No person shall be eligible for appointment as Fertilizer Inspector under this Order unless he possesses the following qualifications, namely:
Graduate in agriculture or science with chemistry as one of the subjects, from a recognized university; and
Training or experience in the quality control of fertilizers and working in the State or Central Government Department of Agriculture.
27B. Qualifications for Appointment of Fertilizer Inspectors for Biofertilizer and Organic Fertilizer
No person shall be eligible for appointment as inspector of biofertilizer and organic fertilizer under this Order unless he possesses the following qualifications, namely:
Graduate in agriculture or science with chemistry/microbiology as one of the subjects; and
Training or experience in the field of quality control of biofertilizers/organic fertilizers.
28. Powers of Inspectors
An inspector may, with a view to securing compliance with this Order:
(a) Require any manufacturer, importer, pool handling agency, wholesale dealer, or retail dealer to give any information in his possession with respect to the manufacture, storage, and disposal of any fertilizer manufactured or, in any manner, handled by him.
(b) Draw samples of any fertilizer in accordance with the procedure of drawal of samples laid down in Schedule II. Provided that the inspector shall prepare the sampling details in duplicate in Form J, and hand over one copy of the same to the dealer or his representative from whom the sample has been drawn;
(ba) Draw samples of any biofertilizers in accordance with the procedure of drawal of samples laid down in Schedule III.
(bb) Draw samples of any organic fertilizers in accordance with the procedure of drawal of samples laid down in Schedule IV.
(c) Enter upon and search any premises where any fertilizer is manufactured/imported or stored or exhibited for sale, if he has reason to believe that any fertilizer has been or is being manufactured/imported, sold, offered for sale, stored, exhibited for sale or distributed contrary to the provisions of this Order.
(d) Seize or detain any fertilizer in respect of which he has reason to believe that a contravention of this Order has been or is being or is [attempted] to be committed.
(e) Seize any books of accounts or documents relating to manufacture, storage, or sale of fertilizers, etc. in respect of which he has reason to believe that any contravention of this Order has been or is being or is about to be committed.
Provided that the Inspector shall give a receipt for such fertilizers or books of accounts or documents so seized to the person from whom the same have been seized;
Provided further that the books of accounts or documents so seized shall be returned to the person from whom they were seized after copies thereof or extracts therefrom as certified by such person have been taken.
Subject to the proviso to paragraphs (d) and (e) of sub-clause (1), the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) relating to search and seizure shall, so far as may be, apply to searches and seizures under this clause.
Provided also that the inspector shall give the stop sale notice in writing to the person whose stocks have been detained and initiate appropriate action as per the provisions of this order within a period of twenty-one days. If no action has been initiated by the inspector within the said period of twenty-one days from the date of issue of the said notice, the notice of stop sale shall be deemed to have been revoked.
Where any fertilizer is seized by an inspector under this clause, he shall forthwith report the fact of such seizure to the collector whereupon the provisions of sections 6A, 6B, 6C, 6D, and 6E of the Act shall apply to the custody, disposal, and confiscation of such fertilizers.
Every person, if so required by an inspector, shall be bound to afford all necessary facilities to him for the purpose of enabling him to exercise his powers under sub-clause (1).

VIII. ANALYSIS OF SAMPLES
29. Laboratory for Analysis
Fertilizer samples drawn by an inspector shall be analyzed in accordance with the instructions contained in Schedule II at:
Central Fertilizer Quality Control and Training Institute, Faridabad,
Regional Fertilizer Control Laboratories at Bombay, Madras, or Kalyani (Calcutta), or
Any other laboratory notified for this purpose by the State Government [with the prior approval of the Central Government].
1A. Biofertilizer samples drawn by an inspector shall be analyzed in accordance with the instructions contained in Schedule III at:
National Centres of Organic Farming, Ghaziabad, or
Regional Centres of Organic Farming at Bangalore, Bhubaneshwar, Hissar, Imphal, Jabalpur, and Nagpur, or
Any other laboratory notified by the Central or State Government.
1B. Organic fertilizer samples drawn by an inspector shall be analyzed in accordance with the instructions contained in Schedule IV at:
National Centres of Organic Farming, Ghaziabad, or
Regional Centres of Organic Farming at Bangalore, Bhubaneshwar, Hissar, Imphal, Jabalpur, and Nagpur, or
Any other laboratory notified by the Central or State Government.
Every laboratory referred to in sub-clause (1) shall, in order to ensure accurate analysis of fertilizer samples, possess minimum equipment and other laboratory facilities as specified from time to time by the Controller in this behalf.
29A. Qualifications for Appointment of Fertilizer Analyst
No person shall be eligible for appointment as a fertilizer analyst for the analysis of fertilizer samples in the laboratories notified under clause 29 of the Order, unless he possesses the following qualifications:
Graduate in Agriculture or Science with chemistry as one of the subjects from a recognized university; and
Training in fertilizer quality control and analysis at Central Fertilizer Quality Control and Training Institute, Faridabad.
Provided that fertilizer analysts appointed before the commencement of this Order, who do not possess the requisite training, shall undergo prescribed training within a period of three years in the Central Fertilizer Quality Control and Training Institute, Faridabad from the date of commencement of this Order.
29B. Laboratories for Referee Analysis
Every laboratory referred to in sub-clause (1) of clause 29 shall be designated as a referee laboratory for the purpose of analysis of any sample of fertilizer:
Provided that no such laboratory which carried out the first analysis of the fertilizer sample shall be so designated in respect of that sample.
Provided further that in respect of any sample, the analysis of which has been challenged, it may be sent for referee analysis to any one of the other laboratories except those which are located in the State or where the first analysis has been done.
Provided also that the Central Fertilizer Quality Control and Training Institute and Regional laboratories shall be considered as one group of laboratories, and a sample first analyzed by any one of them shall not be sent for referee analysis to any other in that group, but only to any other laboratory notified by a State Government.
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Order, the Appellate Authority as specified under paragraph (b) of sub-clause (1) or paragraph (b) of sub-clause (2) of clause 32, in the case of a sample analyzed by the State Government laboratory, or the Controller, in the case of samples analyzed by Central Fertilizer Quality Control and Training Institute, Faridabad or its Regional Fertilizer Control Laboratories, as the case may be, shall decide and send one of the two remaining samples for reference analysis as provided under sub-clause (1).
30. Time Limit for Analysis and Communication of Results
Where a sample of a fertilizer has been drawn, the same shall be dispatched along with a memorandum in Form K and in the case of Organic fertilizers and Biofertilizers in Form KI to the laboratory for analysis within a period of seven days from the date of its drawal.
The laboratory shall analyze the sample and forward the analysis report in Form L and in the case of Organic fertilizer and Biofertilizer in Form LI within [30 days] from the date of receipt of the sample in the laboratory to the authority specified in the said memorandum.
The authority to whom the analysis report is sent under sub-clause (2) shall communicate the result of the analysis to the dealer/manufacturer/importer/pool handling agency from whom the sample was drawn within [15 days] from the date of receipt of the analysis report of the laboratory.
IX. MISCELLANEOUS
31. Suspension, Cancellation or Debarment
A Notified Authority, registering authority, or, as the case may be, the Controller may, after giving the authorized dealer or the holder of certificate of registration or certificate of manufacture or any other certificate granted under this Order, an opportunity of being heard, suspend such authorization letter or certificate or debar the dealer from carrying on the business of fertilizer on one or more of the following grounds:
(a) That the authorization letter or certificate of registration or certificate of manufacture, as the case may be, has been obtained by willful suppression of material facts or by misrepresentation of relevant particulars.
(b) That any of the provisions of this Order or any terms and condition of the Memorandum of Intimation or certificate of registration or the certificate of manufacture, as the case may be, has been contravened or not fulfilled.
Provided that while debarring from carrying on the business of fertilizer or canceling the certificate, the dealer or the certificate holder thereof may be allowed a period of thirty days to dispose of the balance stock of fertilizers, if any, held by him.
Provided further that the stock of fertilizer lying with the dealer after the expiry of the said period of thirty days shall be confiscated.
Where the contravention alleged to have been committed by a person is such as would, on being proved, justify his debarment from carrying on the business of selling of fertilizer or cancellation of authorization letter or certificate of registration or certificate of manufacture or any other certificate granted under this Order to such person, the Notified Authority or registering authority or, as the case may be, the Controller may, without any notice, suspend such certificate or authorization letter as an interim measure:
Provided that the registering authority, Notified Authority or, as the case may be, the Controller shall immediately furnish to the affected person details and the nature of contravention alleged to have been committed by such person and, after giving him an opportunity of being heard, pass final orders either revoking the order of suspension or debarment within fifteen days from the date of issue of the order of suspension.
Provided further that where no final order is passed within the period as specified above, the order of interim suspension shall be deemed to have been revoked without prejudice, however, to any further action which the registering authority, Notified Authority or, as the case may be, the Controller may take against the affected person under sub-clause (1).
Wherever an authorization letter or certificate is suspended, canceled, or the person is debarred from carrying on the business of fertilizer, the Notified Authority, registering authority, or, as the case may be, the Controller shall record a brief statement of the reasons for such suspension or, as the case may be, cancellation or debarment and furnish a copy thereof to the person whose certificate or authorization letter has been suspended or canceled or business has been debarred.
Wherever the person alleged to have committed the contravention is an industrial dealer, the Notified Authority may take action against the holder of such certificate of registration under sub-clause (1) and sub-clause (2):
Provided that where such certificate is suspended or canceled, the Notified Authority shall, within a period of fifteen days from the date of issue of such order of suspension or cancellation, furnish to the Controller also, besides sending the same to the person whose certificate has been suspended or canceled, a detailed report about the nature of contravention committed and a brief statement of the reasons for such suspension or, as the case may be, cancellation.
Provided further that the Controller shall, in the case of the order for suspension passed by the Notified Authority, on receipt of the detailed report and after giving the person an opportunity of being heard, pass final order either revoking the order of suspension or canceling the certificate of registration within fifteen days from the date of receipt of the detailed report from the Notified Authority, failing which the order of interim suspension passed by the Notified Authority shall be deemed to have been revoked, without prejudice however, to further action which the Controller may take against the holder of the certificate under sub-clause (1).
Provided also that the order of cancellation passed by the Notified Authority shall remain effective as if it had been passed by the Controller till such time the Controller, on receipt of the detailed report from the Notified Authority, and if deemed necessary, after giving the person a fresh opportunity of being heard, passes the final order either revoking or confirming the order of cancellation.
32. Appeals at Central Government Level
In any State, where the fertilizer allocation is made by the Central Government under this Order and if the suspension or cancellation of authorization letter of the manufacturer and/or pool handling agency or debarment of business, in any way, has an effect of dislocating the said allocation, and if the Central Government is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient so to do for maintaining the supplies, may direct the concerned State Government to furnish a detailed report about the nature of contravention and a brief statement of the reasons for such suspension or cancellation and pass such order as it may think fit, confirming, modifying, or annulling the order of State Government.
Provided that if the report called by the Central Government is not received from the State Government within a period of fifteen days from the date of issue of the communication, the Central Government may decide the case without the report, on merit.
Any person aggrieved by the analysis report of Central Fertilizer Quality Control and Training Institute or its regional laboratories may appeal to the Controller for referee analysis of such sample within a period of 30 days from the receipt of the analysis report.
Provided that the Controller may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of 30 days from the date of the order appealed.
32A. Appeal at the State Government Level
The State Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify such authority as the Appellate authority before whom the appeals may be filed within 30 days from the date of the order appealed against by any person, except by an industrial dealer, aggrieved by any of the following Orders or actions of the registering authority or a Notified Authority:
(i) Refusing to grant a certificate of manufacture for preparation of mixture of fertilizers or special mixture of fertilizers; or
(ii) Suspending or canceling a certificate of manufacture; or
(iii) Suspending or canceling authorization letter or debarring from carrying on the business of selling of fertilizer, or
(iv) Non-issuance of certificate of manufacture within the stipulated period; or
(v) Non-issuance of amendment in authorization letter within the stipulated period.
Any person aggrieved by the analysis report of fertilizer testing laboratories notified by the State Government may appeal to the appellate authority appointed under sub-clause (1) for reference analysis of such sample within thirty days from the date of receipt of the analysis report.
33. Grant of Duplicate Copies of Authorization Letter or Certificate
Where [authorization letter or] a certificate of registration or a certificate of manufacture or any other certificate granted or, as the case may be, renewed under this Order is lost or [defaced], the Notified Authority, registering authority or, as the case may be, the Controller may, on an application made in this behalf, together with the fee prescribed for this purpose under clause 36, grant a duplicate copy of such certificate.
34. Amendment of Certificate of Registration
The Notified Authority, registering authority or Controller, as the case may be, may, on application being made by the holder of an authorization letter, a certificate of registration, or certificate of manufacture, together with the fee prescribed for the purpose under clause 36, amend an entry in such authorization letter, certificate of registration, or certificate of manufacture, as the case may be.
35. Maintenance of Records and Submission of Returns
The Controller may by an order made in writing direct the dealers, manufacturers, importers, and pool handling agencies:
(a) To maintain such books of accounts, records, etc. relating to their business in Form 'N'; and
(b) To submit to such authority, returns and statements in such form and containing such information relating to their business and within such time as may be specified in that order.
Where a person holds certificates of registration for retail sale and wholesale sale of fertilizers, he shall maintain separate books of accounts for these two types of sales made by him.
Where a State Government, a manufacturer, an importer, and a pool handling agency holds valid certificates of registration for sale of fertilizers in wholesale or retail or both and also for sale for industrial use, he shall maintain separate books of accounts for these two or three types of sales made by him.
Every importer shall inform the Director of Agriculture of the State in which he intends to discharge the imported fertilizer, under intimation to the Central Government, before the import is made or within a period of fifteen days after an indent for import is placed, the following details:
(i) Name of fertilizer
(ii) Name of country of import
(iii) Name of manufacturer
(iv) Quantity to be imported
(v) Date of arrival of the consignment
(vi) Name of the discharge port
(vii) Other information


36. Fees
The fees payable for grant, amendment or renewal of an [authorization letter] or certificate of registration or certificate of manufacture or duplicate copies of such certificates or renewal thereof under this Order shall be such as the State Government may, from time to time, fix, subject to the maximum fees fixed for different purposes by the Central Government. Different fees may be fixed for different purposes, different classes of dealers, or different types of mixtures of fertilizers or special mixtures.
The authority to whom and the manner in which the fee fixed under sub-clause (1) shall be paid shall be specified by the State Government by notification in the Official Gazette.
Any fee paid under sub-clause (1) shall not be refundable unless the grant or renewal of any certificate of registration or certificate of manufacture or duplicate copy of such certificate or renewal under this Order has been refused.
The fees payable for grant, amendment, renewal, or duplicate copy of certificate of registration for industrial dealers and the authority to whom and the manner in which such fee shall be paid, shall be specified by the Controller from time to time by notification in the Official Gazette.
37. Service of Orders and Directions
Any order or direction made or issued by the Controller or by any other authority under this Order shall be served in the same manner as provided in sub-section (5) of section 3 of the Act.
38. Advisory Committee
The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette and on such terms and conditions as may be specified in such notification, constitute a Committee called the Central Fertiliser Committee consisting of a Chairman and not more than ten other persons having experience or knowledge in the field, who shall be members of the Committee, to advise the Central Government regarding:
(i) Inclusion of a new fertilizer under this Order;
(ii) Specifications of various fertilizers;
(iii) Grades/formulations of physical/granulated mixtures of fertilizers that can be allowed to be prepared in a State;
(iv) Requirements of laboratory facilities in a manufacturing unit, including a unit manufacturing physical/granulated mixtures of fertilizers;
(v) Methods of drawal and analysis of samples;
(vi) Any other matter referred by the Central Government to the Committee.
The Committee may, subject to the previous approval of the Central Government, make bye-laws fixing the quorum and regulating its own procedure and the conduct of all business to be transacted by it.
The Committee may co-opt such number of experts and for such purposes or periods as it may deem fit, but any expert so co-opted shall not have the right to vote.
The Committee may appoint one or more sub-committees, consisting wholly of members of the Committee or partly of the members of the Committee and partly of co-opted members as it thinks fit, for the purpose of discharging such of its functions as may be delegated to such sub-committee or sub-committees by the Central Fertiliser Committee.
The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette and on such terms and conditions as may be specified in such notification, constitute a Committee called the State Fertiliser Committee consisting of a Chairman and not more than four other members, having experience or knowledge in the field, including a representative from the State Agricultural University, the Fertiliser Industry, and Indian Micro Fertilisers Manufacturers Association, to advise the State Government regarding the grades/formulations of mixtures or fertilizers.
39. Repeal and Saving
The Fertiliser Control Order, 1957 is hereby repealed except as respects things done or omitted to be done under the said Order before the commencement of this Order.
Notwithstanding such repeal, an order made by any authority, which is in force immediately before the commencement of this Order and which is consistent with this Order, shall continue in force and all appointments made, prices fixed, certificates granted, and directions issued under the repealed Order and in force immediately before such commencement shall likewise continue in force and be deemed to be made, fixed, granted, or issued in pursuance of this Order till revoked.

SCHEDULE I
[See Clause 2(h) & (q)]
PART-A
SPECIFICATIONS OF FERTILISERS
1(a). STRAIGHT NITROGENOUS FERTILISERS
Ammonium Sulphate
a. Moisture per cent by weight, maximum: 1.0
b. Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum: 20.6
c. Free acidity (as H₂SO₄) per cent by weight, maximum: 0.04 for material obtained from by-product ammonia and by-product gypsum, 0.025
d. Arsenic as (As₂O₃) per cent by weight, maximum: 0.01
e. Sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum: 23.0
Urea (46% N) (While free flowing)
a. Moisture per cent by weight, maximum: 1.0
b. Total nitrogen, per cent by weight (on dry basis), minimum: 46.00
c. Biuret per cent by weight, maximum: 1.5
d. Particle size: Not less than 90 per cent of the material shall pass through 2.8 mm IS sieve and not less than 80 per cent by weight shall be retained on 1 mm IS sieve
Urea (coated) (45% N) (While free flowing)
a. Moisture per cent by weight, maximum: 0.5
b. Total nitrogen per cent by weight, content with coating, minimum: 45.0
c. Biuret per cent by weight, maximum: 1.5
d. Particle size: Not less than 90 per cent of the material shall pass through 2.8 mm IS sieve and not less than 80 per cent by weight shall be retained on 1 mm IS sieve
Ammonium Chloride
a. Moisture per cent by weight, maximum: 2.0
b. Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum: 25.0
c. Chloride other than ammonium chloride (as NaCl) per cent by weight (on dry basis), maximum: 2.0
Calcium Ammonium Nitrate (25% N)
a. Moisture per cent by weight, maximum: 1.00
b. Total ammoniacal and nitrate nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum: 25.0
c. Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum: 12.5
d. Calcium nitrate per cent by weight, maximum: 0.5
e. Particle size: Not less than 80 per cent of the material shall pass through 4 mm IS sieve and be retained on 1 mm IS sieve. Not more than 10 per cent shall be below 1 mm IS sieve
Calcium Ammonium Nitrate (26% N)
a. Moisture per cent by weight, maximum: 1.00
b. Total ammoniacal and nitrate nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum: 26.0
c. Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum: 13.0
d. Calcium nitrate per cent by weight, maximum: 0.5
e. Particle size: Not less than 90 per cent of the material shall pass through 4 mm IS sieve and be retained on 1 mm IS sieve. Not more than 5 per cent shall be below 1 mm IS sieve
Anhydrous Ammonia
a. Ammonia per cent by weight, minimum: 99.0
b. Water per cent by weight, maximum: 1.0
c. Oil content by weight, maximum: 20 ppm
Urea Super Granulated
a. Moisture per cent by weight, maximum: 1.00
b. Total nitrogen, per cent by weight (on dry basis), minimum: 46.00
c. Biuret per cent by weight, maximum: 1.5
d. Particle size: Not less than 90 per cent of the material shall pass through 13.2 mm IS sieve and not less than 80 per cent by weight shall be retained on 9.5 mm IS sieve
Urea (Granular)
a. Moisture per cent by weight, maximum: 1.00
b. Total nitrogen, per cent by weight (on dry basis), minimum: 46.00
c. Biuret per cent by weight, maximum: 1.5
d. Particle size: Not less than 90 per cent of the material shall pass through 4 mm IS sieve and be retained on 2 mm IS sieve. Not more than 5 per cent shall be below 2 mm IS sieve
Urea Ammonium Nitrate (32%) (liquid)
a. Total Nitrogen, per cent by weight, minimum: 32.0
b. Urea Nitrogen, per cent by weight, maximum: 16.6
c. Ammonical Nitrogen, per cent by weight, maximum: 15.4
d. Specific gravity at 15°C: 1.300 to 1.320
1(b). STRAIGHT PHOSPHATIC FERTILISERS
Single Super Phosphate (SSP)
a. Moisture per cent by weight, maximum: 3.0
b. Total Phosphoric Acid (P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 16.0
c. Water Soluble Phosphoric Acid (P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 8.0
d. Particle Size: Not less than 95 per cent of the material shall pass through 4.75 mm IS sieve and not more than 5 per cent shall pass through 1.18 mm IS sieve
Triple Super Phosphate (TSP)
a. Moisture per cent by weight, maximum: 2.0
b. Total Phosphoric Acid (P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 44.0
c. Water Soluble Phosphoric Acid (P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 36.0
Diammonium Phosphate (DAP)
a. Moisture per cent by weight, maximum: 0.5
b. Total Phosphoric Acid (P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 46.0
c. Total Nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum: 18.0
d. Water Soluble Phosphoric Acid (P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 40.0
Monoammonium Phosphate (MAP)
a. Moisture per cent by weight, maximum: 0.5
b. Total Phosphoric Acid (P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 48.0
c. Total Nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum: 11.0
d. Water Soluble Phosphoric Acid (P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 39.0
Basic Slag (Granulated)
a. Moisture per cent by weight, maximum: 0.5
b. Total Phosphoric Acid (P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 12.0
c. Water Soluble Phosphoric Acid (P₂O₅) per cent by weight, maximum: 3.0
d. Iron content per cent by weight, minimum: 30.0
Rock Phosphate
a. Moisture per cent by weight, maximum: 2.0
b. Total Phosphoric Acid (P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 30.0
c. Particle size: Not less than 85 per cent of the material shall pass through 0.5 mm IS sieve
1(c). STRAIGHT POTASSIC FERTILISERS
Muriate of Potash (MOP)
a. Moisture per cent by weight, maximum: 1.0
b. Potassium Oxide (K₂O) per cent by weight, minimum: 60.0
c. Chloride (as NaCl) per cent by weight, maximum: 0.05
Sulfate of Potash (SOP)
a. Moisture per cent by weight, maximum: 1.0
b. Potassium Oxide (K₂O) per cent by weight, minimum: 50.0
c. Sulphur as (SO₄) per cent by weight, minimum: 17.0

PART-B
SPECIAL MIXTURES OF FERTILISERS
NPK Mixtures
a. Nitrogen (N) per cent by weight, minimum: 15.0
b. Phosphoric Acid (P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 15.0
c. Potassium Oxide (K₂O) per cent by weight, minimum: 15.0
d. Particle size: Not less than 95 per cent of the material shall pass through 4.75 mm IS sieve and not more than 5 per cent shall pass through 1.18 mm IS sieve
Micronutrient Mixtures
a. Iron (Fe) per cent by weight, minimum: 0.1
b. Manganese (Mn) per cent by weight, minimum: 0.05
c. Zinc (Zn) per cent by weight, minimum: 0.05
d. Copper (Cu) per cent by weight, minimum: 0.02
e. Boron (B) per cent by weight, minimum: 0.02
NOTE: The above specifications are indicative and subject to change as per the requirements specified by the relevant authorities from time to time.

SCHEDULE II
[See Clause 2(uu)]
SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE MANUFACTURE OF FERTILISERS
For Straight Fertilisers:
a. Physical Properties:
i. Bulk Density
ii. Granulation
iii. Particle Size Distribution
b. Chemical Properties:
i. Nutrient Content
ii. Purity
iii. Presence of Contaminants
For Special Fertiliser Mixtures:
a. Nutrient Content:
i. Macro Nutrients
ii. Micro Nutrients
b. Physical Properties:
i. Granulation
ii. Particle Size Distribution
c. Chemical Stability:
i. Compatibility
ii. Reactivity
For Coated Fertilisers:
a. Coating Uniformity:
i. Thickness
ii. Consistency
b. Release Characteristics:
i. Slow Release
ii. Controlled Release
For Liquid Fertilisers:
a. Concentration:
i. Total Nutrient Content
ii. pH
b. Stability:
i. Solubility
ii. Storage Conditions
NOTE: These specifications are subject to amendments as per the latest guidelines issued by the relevant authorities.

       
 3. Ammonium Phosphate Sulphate (16-20-0)
i. Moisture per cent by weight, maximum: 1.0
ii. Total ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum: 16.0
iii. Neutral ammonium citrate soluble phosphates (as P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 20.0
iv. Water soluble phosphates (as P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 19.5
v. Particle size:
- [Not less than] 90 per cent of the material shall pass through 4 mm IS sieve and shall be retained on 1 mm IS sieve.
- Not more than 5 per cent shall be below 1 mm IS sieve.
vi. Sulphur (as S), per cent by weight, minimum: 11.0
4. Ammonium Phosphate Sulphate (20-20-0)
i. Moisture per cent by weight, maximum: 1.0
ii. Total nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum: 20.0
iii. Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum: 18.0
iv. Nitrogen in the form of urea per cent by weight, maximum: 2.0
v. Neutral ammonium citrate soluble phosphates (as P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 20.0
vi. Water soluble phosphates (as P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 17.0
vii. Particle size:
- [Not less than] 90 per cent of the material shall pass through 4 mm IS sieve and shall be retained on 1 mm IS sieve.
- Not more than 5 per cent shall be below 1 mm IS sieve.
viii. Sulphur (as S), per cent by weight, minimum: 13.0
5. Ammonium Phosphate Sulphate Nitrate (20-20-0)
i. Moisture per cent by weight, maximum: 1.5
ii. Total nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum: 20.0
iii. Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum: 17.0
iv. Nitrate nitrogen per cent by weight, maximum: 3.0
v. Neutral ammonium citrate soluble phosphates (as P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 20.0
vi. Water soluble phosphates (as P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 17.0
vii. Particle size:
- 90 per cent of the material shall pass through 4 mm IS sieve and shall be retained on 1 mm IS sieve.
- Not more than 5 per cent shall be below 1 mm IS sieve.
viii. Sulphur (as S), per cent by weight, minimum: 13.0
6. Ammonium Phosphate Sulphate (18-9-0)
i. Moisture per cent by weight, maximum: 1.0
ii. Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum: 18.0
iii. Neutral ammonium citrate soluble phosphates (as P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 9.0
iv. Water soluble phosphates (as P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 8.5
v. Particle size:
- 90 per cent of the material shall pass through 4 mm IS sieve and be retained on 1 mm IS sieve.
- Not more than 5 per cent shall be below 1 mm IS sieve.
7. Nitro Phosphate (20-20-0)
i. Moisture per cent by weight, maximum: 1.5
ii. Total nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum: 20.0
iii. Nitrogen in ammoniacal form per cent by weight, minimum: 10.0
iv. Nitrogen in nitrate form per cent by weight, maximum: 10.0
v. Neutral ammonium citrate soluble phosphates (as P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 20.0
vi. Water soluble phosphates (as P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 12.0
vii. Calcium nitrate, per cent by weight, maximum: 1.0
viii. Particle size:
- [Not less than] 90 per cent of the material shall pass through 4 mm IS sieve and be retained on 1 mm IS sieve.
- Not more than 5 per cent shall be below 1 mm IS sieve.
8. Urea Ammonium Phosphate (28-28-0)
i. Moisture per cent by weight, maximum: 1.5
ii. Total nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum: 28.0
iii. Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum: 9.0
iv. Neutral ammonium citrate soluble phosphate (as P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 28.0
v. Water soluble phosphates (as P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 25.2
vi. Particle size:
- [Not less than] 90 per cent of the material shall pass through 4 mm IS sieve and be retained on 1 mm IS sieve.
- Not more than 5 per cent shall be below 1 mm IS sieve.
9. Urea Ammonium Phosphate (24-24-0)
i. Moisture per cent by weight, maximum: 1.5
ii. Total nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum: 24.0
iii. Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum: 7.5
iv. Nitrogen in the form of urea per cent by weight, maximum: 16.5
v. Neutral ammonium citrate soluble phosphates (as P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 24.0
vi. Water soluble phosphates (as P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 20.4
vii. Particle size:
- [Not less than] 90 per cent of the material shall pass through 4 mm IS sieve and be retained on 1 mm IS sieve.
- Not more than 5 per cent shall be below 1 mm IS sieve.
(Note: This product contains inert filler material such as sand or dolomite to the extent of 20% by weight, maximum.)
10. Urea Ammonium Phosphates (20-20-0)
i. Moisture per cent by weight, maximum: 1.5
ii. Total nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum: 20.0
iii. Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum: 6.4
iv. Neutral ammoniacal citrate soluble phosphates (as P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 20.0
v. Water soluble phosphates (as P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 17.0
vi. Particle size:
- 90 per cent of the material shall pass through 4 mm IS sieve and be retained on 1 mm IS sieve.
- Not more than 5 per cent shall be below 1 mm IS sieve.
(Note: This product contains filler material (inert soil) to the extent of 30% by weight.)
11. Mono Ammonium Phosphate (11-52-0)
i. Moisture per cent by weight, maximum: 1.0
ii. Total nitrogen all in ammoniacal form per cent by weight, minimum: 11.0
iii. Neutral ammonium citrate soluble phosphates (as P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 52.0
iv. Water soluble phosphates (as P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 44.2
v. Particle size:
- 90 per cent of the material shall pass through 4 mm IS sieve and be retained on 1 mm IS sieve.
- Not more than 5 per cent shall be below 1 mm IS sieve.
12. Nitrophosphate (23-23-0)
i. Moisture per cent by weight, maximum: 1.5
ii. Total nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum: 23.0
iii. Nitrogen in ammoniacal form per cent by weight, minimum: 11.5
iv. Nitrogen in nitrate form per cent by weight, maximum: 11.5
v. Neutral ammonium citrate soluble phosphates (as P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 23.0
vi. Water soluble phosphates (as P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 18.5
vii. Calcium nitrate, per cent by weight, maximum: 1.0
viii. Particle size:
- 90 per cent of the material shall pass through 4 mm IS sieve and be retained on 1 mm IS sieve.
- Not more than 5 per cent shall be below 1 mm IS sieve.
13. Urea Ammonium Nitrate (20-10-10)
i. Moisture per cent by weight, maximum: 1.5
ii. Total nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum: 20.0
iii. Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum: 10.0
iv. Nitrogen in nitrate form per cent by weight, maximum: 10.0
v. Water soluble phosphates (as P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 10.0
vi. Particle size:
- 90 per cent of the material shall pass through 4 mm IS sieve and be retained on 1 mm IS sieve.
- Not more than 5 per cent shall be below 1 mm IS sieve.
14. Super Phosphate of Lime (SSP) (16-20-0)
i. Moisture per cent by weight, maximum: 1.0
ii. Total phosphates (as P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 16.0
iii. Water soluble phosphates (as P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 8.0
iv. Particle size:
- [Not less than] 90 per cent of the material shall pass through 4 mm IS sieve and be retained on 1 mm IS sieve.
- Not more than 5 per cent shall be below 1 mm IS sieve.
15. Double Super Phosphate (18-46-0)
i. Moisture per cent by weight, maximum: 1.0
ii. Total phosphates (as P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 46.0
iii. Water soluble phosphates (as P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 40.0
iv. Particle size:
- [Not less than] 90 per cent of the material shall pass through 4 mm IS sieve and be retained on 1 mm IS sieve.
- Not more than 5 per cent shall be below 1 mm IS sieve.
16. Single Super Phosphate (SSP)
i. Moisture per cent by weight, maximum: 1.0
ii. Total phosphates (as P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 16.0
iii. Water soluble phosphates (as P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 8.0
iv. Particle size:
- [Not less than] 90 per cent of the material shall pass through 4 mm IS sieve and be retained on 1 mm IS sieve.
- Not more than 5 per cent shall be below 1 mm IS sieve.

5. Copper Sulphate (CuSO₄.5H₂O)
i. Copper (as Cu), percent by weight, minimum: 24.0
ii. Matter insoluble in water, percent by weight, maximum: 1.0
iii. Soluble iron and aluminium compounds (expressed as Fe), percent by weight, maximum: 0.5
iv. Lead (as Pb), percent by weight, maximum: 0.003
v. pH, not less than: 3.0
vi. Sulphur (as S), percent by weight, minimum: 17.0
6. Ferrous Sulphate (FeSO₄.7H₂O)
i. Ferrous iron (as Fe), percent by weight, minimum: 19.0
ii. Free Acid (as H₂SO₄), percent by weight, maximum: 1.0
iii. Ferric Iron (as Fe), percent by weight, maximum: 0.5
iv. Matter insoluble in water, percent by weight, maximum: 1.0
v. pH, not less than: 3.5
vi. Lead (as Pb), percent by weight, maximum: 0.003
vii. Sulphur (as S), percent by weight, minimum: 10.5
7. Ammonium Molybdate ((NH₄)₆Mo₇O₂₄.4H₂O)
i. Molybdenum (as Mo), percent by weight, minimum: 52.0
ii. Matter insoluble in water, percent by weight, maximum: 1.0
iii. Lead (as Pb), percent by weight, maximum: 0.003
8. Chelated Zinc as Zn-EDTA
i. Appearance: Free flowing crystalline / powder
ii. Zinc content (expressed as Zn), percent by weight, minimum in the form of Zn-EDTA: 2.0
iii. Lead (as Pb), percent by weight, maximum: 0.003
iv. pH: 6.0-6.5
9. Chelated Iron as Fe-EDTA
i. Appearance: Free flowing crystalline / powder
ii. Iron content (expressed as Fe), percent by weight, minimum in the form of Fe-EDTA: 12.0
iii. Lead (as Pb), percent by weight, maximum: 0.003
iv. pH: 5.5-6.5
10. Zinc Sulphate Mono-hydrate (ZnSO₄.H₂O)
i. Free flowing powder form
ii. Matter insoluble in water, percent by weight, maximum: 1.0
iii. Zinc (as Zn), percent by weight, minimum: 33.0
iv. Lead (as Pb), percent by weight, maximum: 0.003
v. Copper (as Cu), percent by weight, maximum: 0.1
vi. Magnesium (as Mg), percent by weight, maximum: 0.5
vii. Iron (as Fe), percent by weight, maximum: 1.0
viii. pH, not less than: 4.0
ix. Sulphur (as S), percent by weight, minimum: 15.0
x. Cadmium (as Cd), percent by weight, minimum: 0.0025
xi. Arsenic (as As), percent by weight, minimum: 0.01
11. Magnesium Sulphate
i. Free flowing crystalline form
ii. Matter insoluble in water, percent by weight, maximum: 1.0
iii. Magnesium (as Mg), percent by weight, minimum: 9.6
iv. Lead (as Pb), percent by weight, maximum: 0.003
v. pH (5% solution): 5.0-8.0
vi. Sulphur (as S), percent by weight, minimum: 12.0
12. Boric Acid (H₃BO₃)
i. Boron (as B), percent by weight, minimum: 17.0
ii. Matter insoluble in water, percent by weight, maximum: 1.0
iii. Lead (as Pb), percent by weight, maximum: 0.003
13. Di-Sodium Octa Borate Tetra Hydrate
i. Boron (as B), percent by weight, minimum: 20.0
ii. Matter insoluble in water, percent by weight, maximum: 1.0
iii. Lead (as Pb), percent by weight, maximum: 0.003
14. Di-Sodium Tetra Borate Penta Hydrate
i. Boron (as B), percent by weight, minimum: 15.0
ii. Matter insoluble in water, percent by weight, maximum: 1.0
iii. Lead (as Pb), percent by weight, maximum: 0.003
iv. Arsenic (as As), percent by weight, minimum: 0.01
v. Particle size: Not less than 95% of the material shall pass through a 5 mm IS sieve and be retained on a 1.4 mm IS sieve.
1(g) Fortified Fertilisers
1. Boronated Single Superphosphate (16% P₂O₅, powdered)
i. Moisture, percent by weight, maximum: 12.0
ii. Free phosphoric acid (as P₂O₅), percent by weight, maximum: 4.0
iii. Water soluble phosphate (as P₂O₅), percent by weight, minimum: 16.0
iv. Boron (as B), percent by weight: 0.15-0.20
2. Zincated Urea
i. Moisture, percent by weight, maximum: 1.0
ii. Total nitrogen per cent by weight (on dry basis), minimum: 43.0
iii. Zinc (as Zn), percent by weight, minimum: 2.0
3. Zincated Phosphate (suspension)
i. Total phosphate (as P₂O₅), percent by weight, minimum: 12.9
ii. Total zinc (Zn), percent by weight, minimum: 19.4
iii. Neutral ammonium citrate soluble phosphate (as P₂O₅), percent by weight, minimum: 3.9
iv. Lead (as Pb), percent by weight, maximum: 0.003
v. pH: 8 ± 1
4. NPK Complex Fertiliser Fortified with Boron (10:26:26:0.3)
i. Moisture, percent by weight, maximum: 0.1
ii. Total nitrogen, percent by weight, minimum: 10.0
iii. Ammoniacal Nitrogen, percent by weight, minimum: 7.0
iv. Urea Nitrogen (as N), percent by weight, maximum: 3.0
v. Neutral Ammonium Citrate Soluble Phosphate (as P₂O₅), percent by weight, maximum: 26.0
vi. Water soluble phosphate (as P₂O₅), percent by weight, minimum: 22.1
vii. Water soluble potash (as K₂O), percent by weight, minimum: 26.0
viii. Boron (as B), percent by weight, minimum: 0.3
ix. Particle size: Not less than 90% of the material shall be between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve and not more than 5% shall be below 1 mm IS sieve.
1(h) 100% Water Soluble Complex Fertiliser
1. Potassium Nitrate (13-0-45)
i. Free flowing crystalline
ii. Moisture, percent by weight, maximum: 0.5
iii. Total Nitrogen (all in Nitrate form), percent by weight, minimum: 13.0
iv. Water soluble Potash (as K₂O), percent by weight, minimum: 45.0
v. Sodium (as Na) (on dry basis), percent by weight, minimum: 1.0
vi. Total Chloride (as Cl) (on dry basis), percent by weight, maximum: 1.5
vii. Matter insoluble in water, percent by weight, maximum: 0.05
2. Omitted
3. Mono-Potassium Phosphate (0-52-34) (100% Water Soluble)
i. Moisture, percent by weight, maximum: 0.5
ii. Water soluble phosphate (as P₂O₅), percent by weight, minimum: 52.0
iii. Water soluble potash (as K₂O), percent by weight, minimum: 34.0
iv. Sodium (as NaCl) percent by weight (on dry basis), maximum: 0.025
4. Calcium Nitrate
i. Total Nitrogen, percent by weight, minimum: 15.5
ii. Ammoniacal Nitrogen, percent by weight, maximum: 1.1
iii. Nitrate Nitrogen (as N), percent by weight, minimum: 14.4
iv. Water soluble Calcium, percent by weight, minimum: 18.8
5. NPK 13:40:13 (100% Water Soluble)
i. Total Nitrogen, percent by weight, minimum: 13.0
ii. Nitrate nitrogen, percent by weight, maximum: 4.4
iii. Ammoniacal nitrogen, percent by weight, minimum: 8.6
iv. Water soluble phosphate (as P₂O₅), percent by weight, minimum: 40.0
v. Water soluble potash (as K₂O), percent by weight, minimum: 13.0
vi. Sodium (as NaCl) percent by weight (on dry basis), maximum: 0.15
vii. Matter insoluble in water, percent by weight, maximum: 0.5
6. NPK 18:18:18 (100% Water Soluble)
i. Total Nitrogen, percent by weight, minimum: 18.0
ii. Nitrate nitrogen, percent by weight, maximum: 9.8
iii. Ammoniacal nitrogen, percent by weight, minimum: 8.2
iv. Water soluble phosphate (as P₂O₅), percent by weight, minimum: 18.0
v. Water soluble potash (as K₂O), percent by weight, minimum: 18.0
vi. Sodium (as NaCl) percent by weight (on dry basis), maximum: 0.25
vii. Matter insoluble in water, percent by weight, maximum: 0.5

7. NPK 13:5:26 (100% Water Soluble)
i. Total Nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum: 13.0
ii. Nitrate nitrogen per cent by weight, maximum: 7.0
iii. Ammonical nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum: 6.0
iv. Water soluble Phosphate (as P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 5.0
v. Water soluble potash as K₂O per cent by weight, minimum: 26.0
vi. Sodium as NaCl per cent by weight (on dry basis), maximum: 0.3
vii. Matter insoluble in water per cent by weight, maximum: 0.5
8. NPK 6:12:36 (100% Water Soluble)
i. Total Nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum: 6.0
ii. Nitrate nitrogen per cent by weight, maximum: 4.5
iii. Ammonical nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum: 1.5
iv. Water Soluble Phosphate (as P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 12.0
v. Water soluble potash per cent by weight, minimum: 36.0
vi. Sodium as NaCl per cent by weight, maximum: 0.5
vii. Matter insoluble in water per cent by weight, maximum: 0.5
9. NPK 20:20:20 (100% Water Soluble)
i. Total Nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum: 20.0
ii. Nitrate nitrogen per cent by weight, maximum: 4.9
iii. Ammonical nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum: 3.0
iv. Urea nitrogen per cent by weight, maximum: 12.1
v. Water soluble Phosphate (as P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 20.0
vi. Water soluble potash as K₂O per cent by weight, minimum: 20.0
vii. Sodium as NaCl per cent by weight (on dry basis), maximum: 0.06
viii. Matter insoluble in water per cent by weight, maximum: 0.5
10. Potassium Magnesium Sulphate
i. Moisture per cent by weight, maximum: 0.5
ii. Potash content (as K₂O) per cent by weight, minimum: 22.0
iii. Magnesium as MgO, percent by weight, minimum: 18.0
iv. Total chloride (as Cl), percent by weight (on dry basis), maximum: 2.5
v. Sodium (as NaCl), percent by weight (on dry basis), maximum: 2.0
vi. Sulphur (as S), percent by weight, minimum: 20.0
11. NPK 19:19:19 (100% Water Soluble)
i. Total Nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum: 19.0
ii. Nitrate nitrogen per cent by weight, maximum: 4.0
iii. Ammonical nitrogen per cent by weight, maximum: 4.5
iv. Urea nitrogen per cent by weight, maximum: 10.5
v. Water soluble Phosphate (as P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 5.0
vi. Water soluble potash as K₂O per cent by weight, minimum: 26.0
vii. Sodium as NaCl per cent by weight (on dry basis), maximum: 0.3
viii. Matter insoluble in water per cent by weight, maximum: 0.5
12. Mono Ammonium Phosphate 12:61:0 (100% Water Soluble)
i. Moisture per cent by weight, maximum: 0.5
ii. Ammonical nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum: 12.0
iii. Water Soluble Phosphate (as P₂O₅) per cent by weight, minimum: 61.0
iv. Sodium as NaCl per cent by weight, maximum: 0.5
v. Matter insoluble in water per cent by weight, maximum: 0.5

Part - B
Tolerance Limit in Plant Nutrient for Various Fertilisers
For fertilisers with definite compounds like ammonium sulphate, urea, ammonium chloride, muriate of potash, sulphate of potash, superphosphate, dicalcium phosphate, sulphur powder, and sulphur granular which contain more than 20 per cent plant nutrients:
Tolerance Level: 0.2
For those which contain less than 20 per cent plant nutrients:
Tolerance Level: 0.1
For calcium ammonium nitrate:
Tolerance Level: 0.3
For diammonium phosphate:
Tolerance Level: 0.5 units each for N & P contents
For nitrophosphates, ammonium sulphate nitrate, urea, ammonium phosphate, ammonium phosphate sulphate, bonemeal, granulated mixture, compound/complex/100% water soluble fertilizer/physical mixtures of fertilizers (NPK mixtures) mixtures of NPK with micronutrients:
Tolerance Level: Varies with nutrient subject to a maximum of 2 per cent for all combined nutrients
Nutrients Tolerance Level:
15 or less: 0.5%
16 to 20: 0.6%
21 or more: 0.7%
Note:
(a) In serial number 4, the term "nutrient" besides NPK also includes Sulphur.
(b) The term "nutrient" in serial numbers 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, and 8 includes N, P, K, S, Ca, Mg, Ge, Mn, Zn, Cu, B, & Mo.
(c) In case of fertilizers where “Sulphur” has been specified in the specification under Schedule I Part A, the tolerance limit shall be the same as prescribed under serial numbers 1, 6, and 8 independently for each Nutrient.

 
 
5. For Borax, Chelated Zinc-EDTA, and Chelated Iron-EDTA
Tolerance Level: 0.1
6. For Solubor, Copper Sulphate, Zinc Sulphate, Manganese Sulphate, and Ferrous Sulphate
Tolerance Level: 0.2
7. For Ammonium Molybdate
Tolerance Level: 0.5
8. For Magnesium Sulphate
Tolerance Level: 0.1
9. For Mixture of Micronutrient Fertilizers
Tolerance varies with combined nutrient level in fertilizer.
Nutrient Level (%)
10 or less: 0.1
11 to 20: 0.2
21 or more: 0.5
10. Particle Size
Tolerance Level: 3 units
11. Moisture
Tolerance Level: 0.3 units

Schedule III
[see clause 2(h) and (q)]
Part – A
Specification of Biofertilizers
Rhizobium
Base: Carrier based* or liquid based
Viable Cell Count: CFU minimum 10⁷ cell/g of carrier material or 10⁷ cell/ml of liquid material
Contamination Level: No contamination at 10⁵ dilution
pH: 6.5 – 7.5
Particle Size (Carrier Based Material): All material shall pass through 0.15-0.212 mm IS Sieve
Moisture Percent by Weight (Carrier Based): Maximum 30-40%
Efficiency Character: Should show effective nodulation on all species listed on the packet
Type of Carrier:
The carrier material such as peat, lignite, peat soil, humus, wood charcoal, or similar material favoring growth of the organism.
Azotobacter
Base: Carrier based* or liquid based
Viable Cell Count: CFU minimum 10⁷ cell/g of carrier material or 10⁷ cell/ml of liquid material
Contamination Level: No contamination at 10⁵ dilution
pH: 6.5 – 7.5
Particle Size (Carrier Based Material): All material shall pass through 0.15-0.212 mm IS Sieve
Moisture Percent by Weight: Maximum 30-40%
Efficiency Character: The strain should be capable of fixing at least 10 mg of nitrogen per g of sucrose consumed
Type of Carrier:
The carrier material such as peat, lignite, peat soil, humus, wood charcoal, or similar material favoring growth of the organism.
Azospirillum
Base: Carrier based* or liquid based
Viable Cell Count: CFU minimum 10⁷ cell/g of carrier material or 10⁷ cell/ml of liquid material
Contamination Level: No contamination at 10⁵ dilution
pH: 6.5 – 7.5
Particle Size (Carrier Based Material): All material shall pass through 0.15-0.212 mm IS Sieve
Moisture Percent by Weight (Carrier Based): Maximum 30-40%
Efficiency Character: Formation of white pellicle in semi-solid Nitrogen-free bromothymol blue media
Type of Carrier:
The carrier material such as peat, lignite, peat soil, humus, wood charcoal, or similar material favoring growth of the organism.
Phosphate Solubilising Bacteria
Base: Carrier based* or liquid based
Viable Cell Count: CFU minimum 10⁷ cell/g of carrier material or 10⁷ cell/ml of liquid material
Contamination Level: No contamination at 10⁵ dilution
pH: 6.5 – 7.5
Particle Size (Carrier Based Material): All material shall pass through 0.15-0.212 mm IS Sieve
Moisture Percent by Weight (Carrier Based): Maximum 30-40%
Efficiency Character: The strain should have phosphate solubilizing capacity in the range of minimum 30%, when tested spectrophotometrically. In terms of zone formation, minimum 5 mm solubilization zone in prescribed media having at least 3 mm thickness
Type of Carrier:
The carrier material such as peat, lignite, peat soil, humus, wood charcoal, or similar material favoring growth of the organism.
Part – B
Tolerance Limit
5 x 10⁵ CFU/g of carrier or per ml of liquid material.

Schedule – IV
[see clause 2(h) and (q)]
Part – A

 
Specification of Organic Fertiliser
1. City Compost:
Moisture, Percent by Weight: 15.0-25.0
Colour: Dark brown to black
Odour: Absence of foul odour
Particle Size: Minimum 90% material should pass through 4.0 mm IS Sieve
Bulk Density (g/cm³): 0.7 - 0.9
Total Organic Carbon, Percent by Weight: Minimum 16.0
Total Nitrogen (as N), Percent by Weight: Minimum 0.5
Total Phosphates (as P₂O₅), Percent by Weight: Minimum 0.5
Total Potash (as K₂O), Percent by Weight: Minimum 1.0
C
Ratio: 20:1 or less
pH: 6.5 – 7.5
Conductivity (as dsm⁻¹): Not more than 4.0
Pathogens: Nil
Heavy Metal Content (as mg/Kg) Percent by Weight, Maximum
Arsenic (as As₂O₃): 10.00
Cadmium (as Cd): 5.00
Chromium (as Cr): 50.00
Copper (as Cu): 300.00
Mercury (as Hg): 0.15
Nickel (as Ni): 50.00
Lead (as Pb): 100.00
Zinc (as Zn): 1000.00
2. Vermicompost:
Moisture, Percent by Weight: 15.0-25.0
Colour: Dark brown to black
Odour: Absence of foul odour
Particle Size: Minimum 90% material should pass through 4.0 mm IS Sieve
Bulk Density (g/cm³): 0.7 - 0.9
Total Organic Carbon, Percent by Weight: Minimum 18.0
Total Nitrogen (as N), Percent by Weight: Minimum 1.0
Total Phosphate (as P₂O₅), Percent by Weight: Minimum 1.0
Total Potassium (as K₂O), Percent by Weight: Minimum 1.0
Heavy Metal Content (as mg/Kg) Percent by Weight, Maximum
Arsenic (as As₂O₃): 10.00
Cadmium (as Cd): 5.00
Chromium (as Cr): 50.00
Mercury (as Hg): 0.15
Nickel (as Ni): 50.00
Lead (as Pb): 100.00
3. Pressmud:
Moisture, Percent by Weight: Maximum 15.0
Total Nitrogen (as N), Percent by Weight: Minimum 1.80
Total Phosphorous (as P₂O₅), Percent by Weight: Minimum 2.00
C
Ratio: Minimum 10:1
Total Potassium (as K₂O), Percent by Weight: Minimum 1.40
pH: 7.0-8.0
Heavy Metal Content (as mg/Kg) Percent by Weight, Maximum
Arsenic (as As₂O₃): 10.00
Cadmium (as Cd): 5.00
Chromium (as Cr): 50.00
Copper (as Cu): 300.00
Mercury (as Hg): 0.15
Nickel (as Ni): 50.00
Lead (as Pb): 100.00
Zinc (as Zn): 1000.00
Part – B
Tolerance Limit of Organic Fertiliser
Combined Nitrogen, Phosphorus, and Potassium Nutrients: 0.1 unit
Grant of Permission for Use of Fertiliser for Industrial Purpose
The manufacturer of an industrial product who intends to use fertilizer as raw material for manufacturing the product may apply to the Central Government in Proforma I (appended below) along with the recommendation from the State Government/Central Government/District Industry Centre of the concerned State.
PROFORMA – I
Name of the Applicant:
Postal Address:
Location and Address Where Factory is Situated:
Name of the Recommending Authority with which the Company is registered i.e., Directorate General Tech. Development/Development Commissioner (Small Scale Industries) Textile Commissioner, Government of India
Registration No. and Date:
Item Manufactured:
Chemical Process of the Item for Which Urea or Other Fertilizers are Required:
Installed Capacity for Each Item Requiring Use of Urea or Other Fertilizer:
Production During Last 3 Years of Each Item Requiring Use of Urea or Other Fertilizers:
Last 3 Years Consumption of Urea or Other Fertilizer (Specify the fertilizer used, each year, supported by a certificate of Chartered Accountant):
Quantity of Urea or Other Fertilizers Purchased During the Last Three Years (Specify the fertilizer purchased each year, supported by a certificate of Chartered Accountant):
Name of the Manufacturer/Dealer (with complete address from whom Urea or other fertilizer was purchased each year):
Whether Recommendation of DGTD/DC (SSI), Textile Commissioner on the Quantity of Fertilizer Required has been Issued and if so, how much quantity of fertilizers has been recommended:
Requirement of Urea or Other Fertilizer for the Current Year:
Whether the Requisite Certificate from Chartered Accountant is Attached with This Application:
Name of the Supplier:
Signature of Authorized Signatory
Documents to be Attached
Application in prescribed proforma
Certificate from the Chartered Accountant of fertilizer purchase/consumption for industrial use
Recommendation from the State Government/Central Government/District Industry Centre of the concerned State Government
Grant of Certificate of Registration for Sale of Fertiliser for Industrial Purpose
Under Clause 8 of Fertiliser (Control) Order, 1985, a Certificate of Registration is granted for carrying on the business of selling Fertiliser for industrial purpose. For this purpose, the application is required to be made to the Controller of Fertilizer in prescribed Form ‘A’ (appended below) together with a fee of Rs. 1500/- and a certificate of source in Form ‘O’ issued by the manufacturer of fertilizer. Currently, the Government of India is granting industrial dealership for sale of Urea only.
FORMS FOR REGISTRATION
FORM ‘A’
{See Clause 8}
FORM OF APPLICATION TO OBTAIN DEALER’S (INDUSTRIAL) CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION*
To
The Controller (if the application is for industrial dealer’s certificate of registration)
Place:
State of:
Full Name and Address of the Applicant:
(a) Name of the Concern and Postal Address:
(b) Place of Business (Please give exact address):
(i) For Sale
(ii) For Storage
Is it a Proprietary/Partnership/Limited Company/Hindu Undivided Family Concern?
Give the name(s) and address(es) of proprietor/partners/manager/Karta:
In What Capacity is This Application Filed:
(i) Proprietor
(ii) Partner
(iii) Manager
(iv) Karta
**Whether the Application is for Wholesale or Retail or Industrial Dealership?
Have You Ever Had a Fertilizer Dealership Registration Certificate in the Past? If so, give the following details:
(i) Registration Number
(ii) Place for Which Granted
(iii) Whether Wholesale or Retail or Industrial Dealership
(iv) Date of Grant of Registration Certificate
(v) Whether the Registration Certificate is Still Valid?
(vi) If Not, When Expired?
(vii) Reasons for Non-Renewal
(viii) If Suspended/Cancelled and If So, When
(ix) Quantity of Fertilizers Handled During Last Year
(x) Names of Products Handled
(xi) Name of Source of Supply of Fertilizers
Was the Applicant Ever Convicted Under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 or Any Order Issued Thereunder Including the Fertiliser (Control) Order, 1957 During the Last Three Years Proceeding the Date of Application? If so, give details.
Give the Details of the Fertilizers to be Handled

Please Attach Certificate(s) of Source from the Supplier(s) Indicated Under Column 3 of Sl. No. 7.
I Have Deposited the Registration Fee of Rs._____________
Vide Challan No._________ dated ___________ in treasury/Bank *or enclose the Demand Draft No. _________________ dated ____________ for Rs._____________ drawn on __________________________________ Bank, in favour of ________ payable at ___________________________________ towards registration fee.
(Please strike-out whichever is not applicable.)
Declaration:
(a) I/we declare that the information given above is true to the best of my/our knowledge and belief and no part thereof is false.
(b) I/we have carefully read the terms and conditions of the Certificate of Registration given in Form ‘B’ appended to the Fertiliser (Control) Order, 1985 and agree to abide by them
(c) *I/we declare that I/we do not possess a certificate of registration for industrial dealer and that I/we shall not sell fertilizers for industrial use. (Applicable in case a person intends to obtain a wholesale dealer or retail dealer certificate of registration, excepting a State Government, a manufacturer or importer or a pool handling agency).
(d) I/we declare that I/we do not possess a certificate of registration for wholesale dealer or retail dealer and that I/we shall not sell fertilizers for agricultural use. (Applicable in case a person intends to obtain an industrial dealer certificate of registration, excepting a State Government, a manufacturer, importer or a pool handling agency).
Signature of the Applicant(s)
Date
Place
Note:
Where the business of selling fertilizers is intended to be carried on at more than one place, a separate application should be made for registration in respect of each such place.
Where a person intends to carry on the business of selling fertilizers both in retail and wholesale, separate applications for retail and wholesale business should be made.
Where a person represents or intends to represent more than one State Government, Commodity Board, Manufacturer/Importer or Wholesale dealer, separate certificate of source from each such source should be enclosed.
*For use in Office of Controller
Date of Receipt:
Name and Designation of Officer Receiving the Application:
Import of 100% Water Soluble Fertilisers for Trial Purpose
The fertigation through drip irrigation and sprinkler irrigation has attained special importance in Agriculture. In view of launching special Horticulture Development Schemes/floriculture programme, the Ministry of Agriculture has been promoting Drip Irrigation System, sprinklers, and fertigation, with a view to improve the use and efficiency of both water and fertilizers. The importers have approached this Ministry for granting permission for importing 100% water soluble fertilizers for trial purpose to establish the efficacy in various crops under field conditions. As per the policy, the Government has allowed up to 5 tonnes per grade of micronutrient or mixture of micronutrient and up to 10 tonnes per grade of NPK fertilizers including complexes/mixtures) in prescribed proforma.
Format for Import of Fertiliser Product for Trials in India
Name of Organization/Company (with full address)
Name of Chemical/Material/Fertilizer with Composition to be Imported
Name of the Country from Which Fertilizer/Material to be Imported:
(1) Name of Organization/Company/Manufacturers
(2) Whether Manufacturer is Authorized to Supply the Material
Quantity of Chemical Material to be Imported
Purpose/Objectives
Experience in the Use of Material in India or Any Other Country
To be enclosed with a brief write-up and data
No. of Trials and Location Where Trials are to be Conducted
Area to be Covered Under Trials
Experimental Programme of Trials
Name of Department/University/Organisation/Farmers Trials to be Conducted Along with Consent Thereof
No. of Seasons Crops for Which Fertilizer Required for Trials
Name of Experienced/Qualified Expertise Available for Handling the Fertilizer Experiment
Cost of Imported Grades Chemicals and Who Will Bear the Cost of Fertilizer/Material for Experiment
For How Many Seasons Trials are Proposed to be Conducted
What is the Proposal After Trial Results are Obtained
Remarks If Any
Signature of Authority

