SUCCESS TALES OF BIHAR FARMERS
Bihar Agricultural University, Sabour

Guidance
Dr. D.R. Singh - Vice Chancellor
Chief Editor
Dr. R.K. Sohane - Director Extension Education
Editors
Dr. R.N. Singh
Dr. Abhay Mankar
Dr. Rajesh Kumar
Dr. Shridhar Patil
Dr. Shweta Shambhavi
Photographer
Mr. Naval Kishor Ray
Mr. Devraj Vikram
Cover Photo
Mr. Manish Kr. Singh - Media Centre, BAU, Sabour
Designed and Printing
Mr. Brajesh Kr. Tiwari - Media Centre, BAU, Sabour
ISBN: 978-81-963064-3-4
Year: 2023
Published By
Directorate of Extension Education
Bihar Agricultural University, Sabour, Bhagalpur (Bihar)
All Rights Reserved
Bihar Agricultural University, Sabour, Bhagalpur (Bihar)

PREFACE
Bihar is an agrarian state with huge agri-entrepreneurial opportunities. Farmers have realized significant results from the adoption of scientific agricultural practices in the state. Although the large majority of Bihar’s farmers are small and marginal, the synergic impact of the state’s fertile soil, abundant fresh water, and availability of an adequate labor force creates greater potential for earning higher income through intensive agriculture.
With the establishment of Bihar Agricultural University, Sabour, under the visionary leadership of Sri Nitish Kumar, Hon’ble Chief Minister of the state, the Government of Bihar has given high priority to agriculture and allied sectors and has made wonderful developments in the state’s agriculture. With financial support from the Government of Bihar and the hard work of the farmers and youth, the state has been blessed with success in every field of agriculture.
With the technical support of the constituent institutes of Bihar Agricultural University, Sabour, such as Krishi Vigyan Kendras, Colleges, etc., hundreds of farmers in the state have achieved great success through their efforts and experiments in agriculture and allied sectors and have also made their socio-economic upliftment. Our scientists have tried to record the journey of some such farmers and youth from experiments to results, resulting in this book.
This work is a small reflection of the success achieved by the farmers through the application of the techniques transferred by the University. This book is not just a collection of success stories of some farmers and youth but also a source of inspiration for other farmers to experiment and innovate in the field of agriculture and allied sectors. I congratulate all the scientists associated with this publication for their efforts. I also extend my warm wishes to the farmers who have achieved new heights of success by taking advantage of advanced techniques and technologies.
D. R. Singh

OUR PROUD FARMERS
1. Name: Vijay Kumar Mandal
Age: 27 Years
Venture: Seed Production
Village: Anduali
Panchayat: Andauli
Block: Kishanpur
District: Supaul
Educational Qualification: B. Tech
Institution Facilitating Venture: KVK, Supaul
SEED PRODUCTION AUGMENTS FARM INCOME OF ENGINEERING GRADUATE
It was sheer matter of destiny that Vijay Kumar Mandal had to take up farming as an occupation. A qualified civil engineer, he had to choose farming as an occupation forced by circumstances. However, Mandal successfully developed and diversified farm activities. At present, he has no remorse about what life had offered him.
Taking up seed production apart from the cultivation of conventional crops, Mandal has diversified farming and also registered income growth. He had to shoulder the responsibility of looking after farm activities of his family following the death of his father. The Mandal family has a total of 18 acres of farmland. Earlier, his father used to look after farm activities. Mandal took charge of agricultural activities in 2016 after completing his B. Tech course.
Cultivation of paddy, wheat, jute, and moong used to be undertaken by the Mandal family previously in comparatively more fertile 14-acre land of their total agricultural holding. He also started cultivating conventional crops after he took up farming as a livelihood occupation. However, low returns from the cultivation of conventional crops were a cause of concern for Mandal.
He intended to diversify farming for supplementing income. Although several options were considered by Mandal, he was unable to decide on a course of action for diversifying farming. Unable to chalk out a diversification plan, he subsequently decided to seek suggestions from scientists of Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK), Supaul.
Mandal met KVK scientists in 2018 to seek their advice on farm diversification. He was advised by scientists to start seed production in addition to the cultivation of conventional crops. The KVK personnel extended him the opportunity to participate in the Bihar Skill Development Mission (BSDM) training programme on seed production.
This was the beginning of his association with KVK. Handholding support from the institution significantly contributed to his success. Mandal took up seed production after successfully completing the 28-day BSDM training programme. Participation in the training programme helped him gain both practical and theoretical knowledge of seed production.
Mandal earmarked two plots of 2.5 acres each for the purpose of seed production. In 2018, he started commercial seed production of both wheat and paddy. For wheat, Mandal started producing seeds of two varieties, namely DBW-14 and Sri Ram-216, while for paddy, he took up seed production of Boro PD, Sweta Mansoori, and DB 11 varieties. He also started seed production of paddy varieties Chandan Chur and Rajendra Mansoori to fulfill his personal seed requirement. On average, Mandal produces 30 quintals each of paddy and wheat seed, taking together different varieties. He has significantly excelled in seed production with all required scientific and technical support from KVK.
In the initial years after Mandal started commercial seed production, he had to face problems in selling his produce. Few people in his locality were aware of his commercial venture, which was a reason behind his problem. The fact that people were not sure about the quality of the seeds produced by him also contributed to his problem.
However, the problem faced by Mandal in selling seeds was resolved after people in his locality gradually came to know that he was producing seeds for commercial purposes, and they were assured about the quality of his seeds. More than 60 farmers in his area approached him for seeds last year. In fact, last year Mandal was virtually unable to meet the supply demand for seeds.
While selling one quintal of wheat seed excluding input cost fetches him an amount between Rs 1500-2000, he earns between Rs 1000-1200 excluding input cost selling one quintal of paddy seed. Mandal has been registering a net income between Rs 4-5 lakh per katha from agricultural activities since he started seed production in addition to the cultivation of conventional crops. Previously, his net income was between Rs 1-1.5 lakh per katha from agricultural activities. Mandal aims to increase seed production activity in the future by taking agricultural plots on lease. By ensuring proper packaging of his produce, he intends to handle the sale of his produce more professionally from next year.

2. Name: Vinita Kumar
Age: 43 Years
Venture: Mushroom Farming
Village: Parasi
Panchayat: Muzaffarpur
Block: Noorsarai
District: Nalanda
Educational Qualification: Diploma in Civil Engineering
Institution Facilitating Venture: KVK, Nalanda
MUSHROOM FARMING PAVES WAY FOR SELF-EMPLOYMENT
Vinita Kumar had started mushroom farming driven by his strong urge to do something on his own for livelihood. A well-qualified man, he had previously served in the private sector for almost 15 years working in different organizations. It was in 2018 that he finally decided to quit his job and take up farming as a livelihood occupation.
In fact, Kumar was never satisfied serving in the private sector. His dissatisfaction also contributed to his willingness to look for self-employment opportunities. Given that Kumar belonged to an agrarian family, he always had farming in the back of his mind while looking for self-employment opportunities.
Initially, he was slightly hesitant about taking up farming. Since Kumar’s family had only three acres of agricultural land, he was hesitant. Taking into consideration that his father and two brothers were already involved in the farming of conventional crops in the family agricultural holding, Kumar was keen on taking up agricultural activity requiring comparatively less land. This led him to consider mushroom farming. Kumar, who was able to establish himself as a successful mushroom grower, gained initial know-how about mushroom farming by watching videos on YouTube.
Subsequently, he decided to contact scientists at Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK) and Nalanda College of Horticulture (NCOH), Noorsarai for upgrading his knowledge concerning mushroom cultivation. Kumar, toying with the idea of beginning farming, tentatively decided to start mushroom cultivation before leaving his job. He had been in contact with scientists at NCOH and KVK, Nalanda since 2017. The assurance of all required support given by scientists helped Kumar make a firm decision regarding mushroom cultivation.
The handholding support extended to him by KVK and NCOH significantly contributed to his success as a mushroom grower. In June 2017, Kumar was enrolled by NCOH to participate in a training programme on mushroom farming. He was able to learn scientific techniques of mushroom farming

5. Khagesh Mandal
Age: 32 Years
Venture: Strawberry Farming
Village: Usmanpur
Panchayat: Usmanpur
Block: Kharik
District: Bhagalpur
Educational Qualification: Matriculate
Institution Facilitating Venture: Bihar Agriculture University, Sabour

Farmer Doubles Income Through Strawberry Farming
A little more than two years ago, Khagesh Mandal primarily grew conventional crops and vegetables. He had hardly any idea that strawberry farming could be a viable option for diversification and increasing income.
Mandal experimented with strawberry cultivation for the first time after it was introduced in his area in 2018-19 under an Australia-India Council funded project. Implemented by Bihar Agriculture University (BAU), Sabour, the project aimed to promote strawberry cultivation as an alternative fruit. Demonstration farming of strawberry was conducted in the fields of selected farmers, with Mandal being one of three farmers in Usmanpur village who participated in this demonstration.
The encouraging return from the first year led Mandal to continue strawberry cultivation in the subsequent year, 2019-20. Belonging to an agrarian family, he had started farming in 2016. His family, owning only one acre of land, had leased three acres for agricultural activities. Mandal and his two brothers are engaged in farming.
The cultivation of conventional crops was failing to provide desired returns, prompting Mandal to start cultivating papaya and cauliflower to supplement his income. Previously, he had grown bananas extensively but discontinued banana cultivation due to the high prevalence of Panama wilt disease.
Mandal’s income from cauliflower cultivation, on average, ranged between Rs 80,000 to Rs 85,000 per hectare for early varieties. However, his profit from late cauliflower varieties, sown in the last week of December and harvested after mid-January, was generally low due to a sharp drop in cauliflower prices after mid-January. Considering discontinuing late cauliflower varieties, Mandal decided to start strawberry farming when the BAU team encouraged him, explaining how strawberry cultivation could increase his income. They informed him that sowing of strawberry plants could be done in late December, with fruits harvested from January onwards.
Under the project, in 2018-19, Mandal, along with two other farmers in his village, was provided 500 strawberry plants each free of cost for demonstration farming. The plants included Nabila and Camarosa varieties. Mandal was able to grow approximately 1.60 quintals of strawberries in his first year. Combined with the production of the other two farmers, the total strawberry production in Usmanpur village was around two quintals in the initial year.
Although the first year’s production was encouraging quantity-wise, selling the produce proved slightly difficult due to the relatively unknown status of strawberries in the region. With assistance from the BAU team, growers managed to sell strawberries at a reasonably good rate of Rs 300 and above per kilogram through local contacts. Mandal’s net income from strawberry farming was approximately Rs 50,000 in the first year.
In the subsequent year (2019-20), Mandal and the other farmers purchased 4,000 strawberry plants each of Nabila and Camarosa varieties from Pune and Siliguri. Mandal’s second-year production was around four quintals, with the total production in Usmanpur village exceeding seven quintals. Mandal registered a net income of Rs 1.10 lakh from strawberry sales in the second year. The BAU team created a WhatsApp group to facilitate the online sale of strawberries, which helped avoid the selling difficulties experienced in the first year. Strawberry growers now receive an average supply order of 100 kilograms per day during the season. Mandal, sometimes flooded with orders, is unable to meet the demand. His annual net income from agricultural activities has almost doubled since starting strawberry farming, rising from approximately Rs 1.10 lakh to more than Rs 2.10 lakh in 2019-20. Due to the profitability, Mandal plans to expand strawberry farming and intends to grow Winter Dawn in addition to Nabila and Camarosa varieties this year.

6. Sanjeet Kumar Singh
Age: 40 Years
Venture: Afforestation and Horticulture
Village: Baroun
Panchayat: Darama
Block: Kawakol
District: Nawada
Educational Qualification: Intermediate
Institution Facilitating Venture: Krishi Vigyan Kendra, Nawada

Farmer Addresses Livelihood Issues Through Horticulture and Afforestation
Life is much better now for Sanjeet Kumar Singh, a small farmer, compared to the past. Previously, due to a lack of adequate resources, life was challenging. However, Singh successfully resolved his livelihood problems through afforestation of his 10 katha barren land and by starting small-scale horticultural activities. He also engages in other activities to supplement his income, but horticulture and afforestation primarily address his family’s needs. Singh now earns more than three lakh rupees annually.
Forced to discontinue his education after intermediate due to financial problems, Singh migrated to Bengaluru and later to Delhi for livelihood following his marriage in 2002. He worked as a security guard in a private firm during his stay in Bengaluru and Delhi but was dissatisfied with his earnings. Returning to his village in 2004, Singh faced challenges finding suitable livelihood opportunities due to limited employment scope.
Keen on agriculture as a livelihood source, Singh lacked concrete ideas about profitable farming practices. He initially established a poultry farm on land adjacent to his house. With 300 birds, Singh generated income from poultry business, but it was insufficient to meet his family’s needs and the educational expenses of his two sons and a daughter. Singh subsequently opened a general store and a cosmetic shop, now run by his wife, to supplement his income. These ventures led to a slight increase in income but it was through afforestation and horticulture that Singh achieved economic self-sufficiency.
In 2010-11, Singh participated in a training program on nursery raising and management organized by Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK), Nawada. This training led him to explore earning a livelihood through afforestation. KVK scientists suggested agroforestry and horticulture as viable options. Singh discussed with scientists how to utilize his barren land, having been in contact with KVK since returning to his village. KVK had previously provided technical assistance for his poultry venture, including improved breed poultry birds for frontline demonstration.
Following KVK’s guidance, Singh began afforestation of his barren land, which included forest department land adjacent to his property. He planted various fruit-bearing trees such as mango, guava, blackberry, jackfruit, wood apple, and vine fruit, along with wood-value trees. Singh received technical and scientific support and quality planting materials from KVK. Ensuring water availability for the trees was a major challenge due to the lack of a nearby water source. Singh purchased a motor-driven cart (locally referred to as Jharjhariya or Jugadgari) to transport water from a source located more than one kilometer away, which significantly helped resolve the water issue.
Currently, Singh owns a total of 564 fully grown trees on his barren land and adjacent forest department land. He earns approximately Rs 29,000 annually from fruit sales and Rs 33,000 from selling chopped wood. Every year, Singh trims 100 trees, selling the dry branches as wood and firewood. He also grows tomato and brinjal as a sharecropper on a close relative’s land, earning Rs 15,000 and Rs 4,000 per annum, respectively. His annual net income from poultry farming is approximately Rs 78,000. His total income, including earnings from the general store, cosmetic shop, and his sons’ online application form business, amounts to Rs 1.60 lakh per annum. Singh’s two sons contribute approximately Rs 47,000 annually to the family income. Looking forward, Singh plans to increase the number of trees to 1,000 by further plantation.
10. Ajeet Kumar Singh
Age: 28 years
Venture: Para Vet Service Provider
Village: Rangabhitta
Panchayat: Fala
Block: Pothia
District: Kishanganj
Educational Qualification: Graduate
Institution Facilitating Venture: Krishi Vigyan Kendra, Kishanganj
Skill Acquisition Brings Self-Employment Opportunity for Youth
After graduating, Ajeet Kumar Singh was keen on securing a conventional job. Like the majority of youth his age, he wanted to avoid the uncertainties of unconventional jobs. However, destiny had something else in store for him. Unable to find a conventional source of employment, he was forced to address livelihood issues through self-employment.
Acquiring skills related to para vet services, including artificial insemination, Singh established himself as a para vet service provider. He currently earns an average of Rs 1,30,000 annually by providing para vet services and has no regrets regarding his failure to secure a conventional job.
Training and Skill Development
An opportunity to participate in the Bihar Skill Development Mission (BSDM) training programme significantly helped Singh in establishing himself as a para vet service provider. The training programme was organized by Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK), Kishanganj.
Previously, Singh had come in contact with KVK personnel through workshops on Rabi and Kharif crops organized by the agriculture department and district administration. Singh was invited to visit KVK and was informed about the latest advancements in agriculture, including BSDM training programmes. The KVK personnel explained that the primary objective of these programmes was to provide self-employment opportunities for youth.
Singh joined the BSDM course on pesticide and fertilizer application at KVK and received a certificate upon successful completion. The course improved his farming practices by ensuring the proper use of pesticides, fertilizers, and seed treatment.
Para Vet Services
Singh was already involved in farming alongside assisting his father. He applied the knowledge from the BSDM course to his farming practices, leading to increased farm output. However, he sought additional income opportunities beyond farming.
In 2019, KVK scientists informed Singh about a training programme on artificial insemination conducted by ASCI under the skill development programme. Singh registered for the course and received a certificate of participation upon completion.
Encouraged by KVK, Singh started providing artificial insemination services in his village and surrounding villages. He now serves over 40 villages in 22 panchayats, offering preliminary treatment for cattle and goats, vaccination services, and tagging.
Income and Future Goals
Singh's income has increased significantly with the diversification of his services. He continues to stay in touch with KVK personnel to keep updated on skill development opportunities and aims for further skill development as a para vet service provider.

11. Manish Kumar Thakur
Age: 30 years
Venture: Plant Nursery
Village: Phulwari
Panchayat: Chakla
Block: Kishanganj
District: Kishanganj
Educational Qualification: Graduate
Institution Facilitating Venture: Krishi Vigyan Kendra, Kishanganj
Chance Entry in Plant Business Brings Fortune for Youth
For Manish Kumar Thakur, entering the plant business was a matter of chance. After graduating in 2012, he sought conventional employment and secured a job as a collection agent in 2015. However, dissatisfaction with his job led him to quit in 2017.
Starting the Plant Business
While exploring alternative livelihood opportunities, Thakur decided to start a plant business. Motivated by a relative involved in plantation work, he invested Rs 15,000 to purchase plants and began door-to-door selling. Despite initial losses, he persevered and expanded his business to include the supply of bay leaf and litchi plants.
Business Expansion
Thakur diversified his business to include decorative plants and kitchen garden plants, building a working capital of Rs 70,000. His significant success came from selling Erica Palm, a decorative plant, which has helped him build a substantial working capital.
Establishing Nursery
In 2018, Thakur leased eight Katha of land in his village for Rs 12,000 annually and established a nursery. He received scientific and technical support from KVK, leading to the cultivation of medicinal plants like Ashwagandha, Kalmegh, Lemon Grass, and Tulsi.
Income and Future Plans
Thakur's business has grown substantially. He earns approximately Rs 1.5 lakh to Rs 2 lakh annually from selling plants and providing maintenance services. Additionally, he earns around Rs 72,000 annually from vermicompost production. His cumulative income exceeds Rs 4 lakh per annum. Thakur aims to expand his business further by supplying plants to more households and commercial establishments.

12. Chunchun Kumar
Age: 44 years
Village: Ramnagar Bartara
Panchayat: Suari Immamnagar
Block: Ramgarh Chowk
District: Lakhisarai
Venture: Lathyrus Farming
Educational Qualification: Graduation
Institution Facilitating Venture: Bihar Agricultural University, Sabour
Adoption of New Lathyrus Varieties Increases Profit Earning of Farmer
Chunchun Kumar, unlike many other farmers, never completely discontinued the cultivation of Lathyrus (grass pea). Despite its adverse effects on human health, he continued limited cultivation for utilizing rice fallow land and animal feed.
Transition to New Varieties
Kumar has a 30-acre agricultural land and initially cultivated traditional crops like paddy and wheat. In 2018, he was informed by KVK and university scientists about two new Lathyrus varieties, Ratan and Prateek, developed to be safe for human consumption.
Motivated by the scientists, Kumar started cultivating the new variety, Prateek, with 25 kilograms of seeds provided by KVK. His first-year yield of six quintals was sold to KVK at Rs 3,700 per quintal, providing him with a significant profit compared to the local variety.
Expansion and Success
Encouraged by the returns, Kumar expanded his cultivation to three acres in 2019 and recorded a yield of 15 quintals, which he sold to KVK at Rs 4,200 per quintal. In 2020, he further increased his cultivation to four acres and distributed seeds to fellow farmers.
Impact and Adoption
The adoption of the new Lathyrus varieties has increased significantly in Kumar’s village and nearby areas. The Biotech Kissan Project has played a crucial role in promoting these new varieties, improving the overall income and health benefits for the farmers in the region.
1. Raj Shekhar
Name: Raj Shekhar
Age: 42 Years
Venture: Katarni Farming
Village: Desari
Panchayat: Bhawanipur, Desari
Block: Jagdishpur
District: Bhagalpur
Educational Qualification: Intermediate Science (I. Sc.)
Institution Facilitating Venture: Bihar Agriculture University, Sabour
Background and Achievements:
Raj Shekhar has continued cultivating the Katarni variety of paddy, a tradition followed by his family for generations. Despite initial low returns and challenges like qualitative degeneration, he chose to maintain the legacy due to the variety's fine grain quality and aroma.
By 2005, he began cultivating Katarni on his five-acre family land. Over time, despite facing issues with seed impurities and reduced yield, he persisted with the cultivation.
The Bihar Agricultural University (BAU) initiated a Katarni refinement project that led to the development of Suddh Katarni, which restored the quality of the variety. The GI tag was awarded to Katarni in 2017.
Raj Shekhar's yield improved significantly with Suddh Katarni, reaching up to 12 quintals per hectare. His net income increased to slightly above Rs 2 lakh per annum.
He has also started organic farming of Katarni and plans to expand this practice, selling organic produce at Rs 6000 per quintal.
2. Subodh Kumar Singh
Name: Subodh Kumar Singh
Age: 48 Years
Venture: Dairy Farming
Village: Kharkhura
Panchayat: Kujapi
Block: Nagar Chanduati
District: Gaya
Educational Qualification: BA, LLB
Institution Facilitating Venture: Krishi Vigyan Kendra, Manpur, Gaya
Background and Achievements:
Subodh Kumar Singh transitioned from a potential government job to become a successful dairy farmer in 1998, starting with three cows and expanding to 100 cows and 25 buffaloes.
Despite having no prior experience, Singh was driven by his entrepreneurial spirit and supported by Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK), which provided technical and scientific assistance.
He implemented modern dairy practices including pedigree management, CCTV surveillance, central milking systems, and quality feed production, which improved milk quality and profitability.
Singh produces 800-900 liters of milk daily, supplies to local households and food outlets, and also produces paneer. His business employs 14 people and generates an annual gross turnover of Rs 70 lakh.
He received the national dairy award in 2011 and the best farmer award from Bihar Agricultural University (BAU).
3. Ranjan Kumar Suman
Name: Ranjan Kumar Suman
Age: 57 Years
Venture: Farm Machine Bank
Village: Barhari
Panchayat: Sonudih Satjori
Block: Goradih
District: Bhagalpur
Educational Qualification: Graduate
Institution Facilitating Venture: Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK), Sabour
Background and Achievements:
Ranjan Kumar Suman initially practiced conventional farming but switched to mechanized farming in 2011-12. The move to mechanization involved significant investment and overcoming resistance from fellow farmers.
Supported by KVK Sabour, Suman adopted direct seeding methods and acquired various farm machines with government subsidies.
His net income increased significantly due to reduced input costs and increased productivity. Suman established a farm implements bank, RK Krishi Yantra Bank, which rents out machinery and supports other farmers in adopting mechanized farming.
His annual net income from farming is approximately Rs 4.5 lakh, and he earns an additional Rs 5 lakh from renting out farm machinery.
  
Binesh Prasad
Age: 46
Venture: Onion Farming
Village: Kamalpur
District: Sheikhpura
Educational Qualification: Postgraduate
Institution Facilitating Venture: Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK), Sheikhpura
Background: Binesh Prasad, a postgraduate, initially qualified for a police position but chose to pursue agriculture, joining his family's farming activities. His family owns about 100 acres of land, with onion being a major crop.
Achievements:
Cultivates onions on 30 acres, up from 12 acres.
Adopts the Sukhsagar variety for its superior yield (240 quintals/hectare) and lower cost compared to the local Beloria variety.
Annual net income from onion farming ranges between Rs 25-50 lakh.
Total annual turnover, including supply and marketing, is around Rs 5 crore.
Benefitted from KVK's training on scientific cultivation, grading, and packaging.

Ashok Kumar Choudhary
Age: 59
Venture: Nursery and Mango Farming
Village: Maheshi
District: Bhagalpur
Educational Qualification: B.Sc, LLB
Institution Facilitating Venture: Bihar Agricultural University, Sabour
Background: Ashok Kumar Choudhary transitioned from a physical instructor to farming, focusing on mango cultivation. He is renowned for his Jardalu mango, a GI-tagged variety.
Achievements:
Manages 300 Jardalu trees; known for high-quality mangoes used in prestigious gift packs.
Runs a nursery with over 300 plant varieties, including rare Biju mango and new hybrids like Modi-1 and Modi-2.
Gross income from nursery is about Rs 10 lakh annually, with a net income of over Rs 4 lakh from mangoes.
Active in promoting Jardalu mango and organizing growers.

Aswani Kumar Verma
Age: 50
Venture: Groundnut Farming
Village: Subhankarpur
District: Araria
Educational Qualification: MA (Economics)
Institution Facilitating Venture: Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK), Araria
Background: Aswani Kumar Verma revived and popularized groundnut farming in his village, which had previously faced challenges.
Achievements:
Cultivates groundnuts on 1.5 acres; net income is around Rs 1.4 lakh.
Initially faced challenges but increased his income significantly after KVK's support and adopting high-yielding varieties like BH-86.
Annual income increased from Rs 10 lakh to Rs 20 lakh.
Engages in additional activities like animal husbandry and vegetable cultivation, with a total annual income of Rs 20 lakh.

Abhishek Kumar
Age: 34
Venture: Integrated Farming
Village: Barauli
District: Aurangabad
Educational Qualification: Bachelor in Business Administration
Institution Facilitating Venture: Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK), Aurangabad
Background: Abhishek Kumar shifted from a business administration career to agriculture, aiming to modernize and diversify his family's farming practices.
Achievements:
Implements integrated farming, including floriculture and fish farming.
Achieved net incomes of Rs 112,000 from mentha, Rs 225,903 from gladiolus, and Rs 68,062 from tuberose.
Expanded to include fish farming with a net income of Rs 215,872.
Total annual gross income now ranges from Rs 15-16 lakh.

Amresh Singh
Age: 38
Venture: Farming of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants
Village: Karamdih
District: Aurangabad
Educational Qualification: Intermediate
Institution Facilitating Venture: Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK), Aurangabad
Background: Amresh Singh faced challenges due to blue bull damage but found success by switching to medicinal and aromatic plant farming.
Achievements:
Started cultivating medicinal and aromatic plants after training at CISR-CIMAP and receiving support from KVK.
Achieved a net income of Rs 4.5 lakh in his first year of cultivation.
Expanded his farming to include conventional crops, with an average annual net income of Rs 15 lakh.
 1. Arjun Singh
Age: 38 Yrs
Venture: Vegetable Farming
Village: Masona
Panchayat: Amethi
Block: Sanjouli
District: Rohtas
Educational Qualification: Intermediate (Arts)
Institution Facilitating Venture: Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK), Rohtas
Organizational Capability of Grower Makes Vegetable Farming Lucrative
Arjun Singh’s ability to view problems from a broader perspective enabled him to increase his income from vegetable farming and assist other horticulturists in his area.
Background
Singh began farming on his one-acre land in 2006 after completing intermediate education. Due to limited resources, he had to discontinue his studies and pursue farming. Despite initial resource constraints, Singh aimed to excel in agriculture.
Initial Challenges and Innovations
Facing low income from vegetable farming, Singh identified dependence on middlemen as a major issue. He decided to organize farmers to sell produce directly to bulk buyers. With support from KVK, Singh formed a farmer’s group called “Krisak Het Samuh, Masona” in 2009.
Achievements
The group explored direct market linkages and successfully established contact with bulk purchasers in Delhi, Meerut, and Kanpur. This led to a significant increase in income, with the group registering Rs 1.2 crore in 2019 through tomato sales. Singh's net income from tomatoes rose to Rs 3.00 lakh to Rs 3.5 lakh per season.
Current Status
Tomato farming has expanded in Masona, with over 200 acres dedicated to it. Singh also formed another group, “Pragatesheel Kissan Club,” increasing the membership and overall vegetable production in the area. The area is now known as a tomato hub in Bihar.

2. Chandan Kumar Jha
Age: 39
Venture: Farming of Aromatic and Medicinal Plants
Village: Singarpur
Panchayat: Nayanagar
Block: Uda Kishunganj
District: Madhepura
Educational Qualification: Graduate
Institution Facilitating Venture: Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK), Madhepura
First Timer in Agriculture Succeeds in Creating Mark
Chandan Kumar Jha, a newcomer to agriculture, successfully ventured into farming of aromatic and medicinal plants.
Background
Jha had no prior agricultural experience and worked in a foreign company after graduating in commerce. He returned home in 2011 to take charge of his family’s farm following his father’s death.
Initial Ventures and Challenges
Initially growing wheat and maize, Jha found limited returns. He sought advice from Bihar Agricultural University and KVK, leading him to explore farming of aromatic and medicinal plants.
Achievements
Jha started cultivating Shatavari (Asparagus) and Kalmegh but faced setbacks. He returned to farming after Madhepura district was included in the Aroma Mission programme. With KVK’s support, he expanded to aromatic plants like mentha, khas, chamomile, and geraniums, and started organic vegetable farming.
Current Status
Jha’s net annual income increased from Rs 1-1.5 lakh in 2012 to around Rs 3.5 lakh. He established a Farmer Producer Organization (FPO) and is also involved in a farm implement bank, assisting local farmers with modern equipment.

3. Arbind Kumar
Age: 40 Yrs
Venture: Poultry Farming
Village: Rukum Pura
Panchayat:
Block: Modanganj
District: Jehanabad
Educational Qualification: Matriculation
Institution Facilitating Venture: Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK), Jehanabad
Skill Development Proves Game Changer for Erstwhile Salesman
Arbind Kumar’s success in poultry farming was significantly boosted by skill development training.
Background
Kumar, from a financially underprivileged family, had to discontinue his education after matriculation. He worked as a salesman in Chhattisgarh before returning to his village in 2003 to help with farming.
Initial Ventures and Challenges
Kumar started poultry farming with 200 broilers in 2005-06 but struggled with income. He realized the need for formal training to improve his poultry management techniques.
Achievements
In 2017, Kumar received training from KVK, learning scientific poultry management techniques. He increased his poultry from 800 to over 2400 birds, improving his monthly income from Rs 8000-10000 to Rs 45000-50000. He also diversified into cow and fish farming, further boosting his income.
Current Status
Kumar plans to start layer poultry farming and continue expanding his ventures.

4. Suman Kumar
Age: 22 Yrs
Venture: Beekeeping
Village: Jairam Bigha
Panchayat: Modanganj
Block: Modanganj
District: Jehanabad
Educational Qualification: Intermediate
Institution Facilitating Venture: Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK), Jehanabad
Beekeeping Proves Useful in Sustenance for Sharecropper
Suman Kumar turned to beekeeping to supplement his income from sharecropping.
Background
Kumar, with limited land and financial resources, started sharecropping after discontinuing his studies. His income was inadequate to meet family needs.
Initial Ventures and Challenges
Kumar became interested in beekeeping through online research. He sought guidance from KVK and participated in a training program, which provided him with ten bee boxes and technical support.
Achievements
Kumar started beekeeping in 2020, extracting over 80 kg of honey in eight months. He recovered his initial investment and earned additional income. His success in beekeeping has encouraged others in his area to start similar ventures.
Current Status
Kumar plans to expand his apiary to 150 boxes and aims to increase his annual income to Rs one lakh. He is committed to making beekeeping his primary livelihood.

5. Neelam Kumari
Age: 43 Yrs
Venture: Plant Grafting
Village: Bhangbal Bigha
Panchayat: Daruara
Block: Noorsarai
District: Biharsharif
Educational Qualification: Studied up to Class 12
Institution Facilitating Venture: Nalanda College of Horticulture (NCOH), Noorsarai, Nalanda
Skill Acquisition Brings Economic Self-Reliance for Home Maker
Neelam Kumari’s acquisition of grafting skills transformed her financial situation.
Background
Neelam, primarily a homemaker, wanted to contribute to her family’s income. With a two-acre agricultural land, she realized that farm income was insufficient.
Initial Ventures and Challenges
Neelam sought self-employment opportunities and discovered a gardening training program at NCOH. She completed a 300-hour training in grafting and advanced plant propagation techniques.
Achievements
Neelam utilized her grafting skills, initially working with KVK and then with private nurseries. She now grafts 150-200 plants per day, earning approximately Rs 15000 per month. She plans to expand into beekeeping and possibly establish her own nursery in the future.
Current Status
Neelam’s contribution has improved her family’s financial condition. She aims to further augment her income and become a self-employed entrepreneur.
Manoj Kumar
Age: 42 Years
Venture: Mushroom and spawn production
Village: Punsia
Panchayat: Rajoun
Block: Rajoun
District: Banka
Educational Qualification: Intermediate
Institution Facilitating Venture: Bihar Agricultural University (BAU), Sabour
Profile:
Manoj Kumar, a retired army personnel, sought economic self-reliance after retirement and decided to venture into agriculture. Given his family’s agricultural background, he was inclined towards farming but wanted to pursue something unique rather than conventional crops. In 2011, Kumar sought advice from scientists at BAU and was encouraged to start mushroom farming. He participated in a training program organized by BAU, which provided him with technical skills and support for starting mushroom cultivation.
Kumar began with oyster mushrooms due to the ease of cultivation and the availability of agricultural waste for production. He started small with 300 sq meters and gradually expanded to 3000 sq meters, adding varieties like white milky mushrooms and button mushrooms. His initial success led him to address challenges related to market linkage by supplying his produce to hotels and establishing local connections.
He also set up a small spawn lab to overcome the challenges of spawn supply and now sells 15-16 kilograms of spawn daily, with an annual income between Rs 2.0 lakh and Rs 2.5 lakh from both mushrooms and spawn. Kumar’s success has inspired many in his village to take up mushroom farming, and he has also facilitated a common selling counter for local growers.
Achievements:
Mushroom Varieties: Oyster, white milky, and button mushrooms.
Production Area: Expanded from 300 sq meters to 3000 sq meters.
Net Monthly Income: Around Rs 25,000 during the season.
Annual Income: Rs 2.0 lakh to Rs 2.5 lakh from mushrooms and spawn.
Additional Contributions: Established a spawn lab, provided training, and motivated others in mushroom farming.

Dilip Kumar Singh
Age: 51 Years
Venture: Vegetable farming
Village: Mehaddiganj
Panchayat: Mohaddiganj
Block: Sasaram
District: Rohtas
Educational Qualification: Intermediate
Institution Facilitating Venture: Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK), Rohtas
Profile:
Dilip Kumar Singh, initially a marginal farmer, transitioned to large-scale vegetable farming with significant support from KVK, Rohtas. After starting vegetable farming in 1993 on a two-acre leased land, Singh faced challenges, particularly with disease management. In 2008, KVK scientists helped him save his cauliflower crop from disease, which marked the beginning of his association with KVK.
Singh participated in various training programs, including one organized by the Indian Institute of Vegetable Research (IIVR) and Banaras Hindu University (BHU), which introduced him to advanced techniques. Motivated by the training, he expanded his farming area to 20 acres and embraced both organic and inorganic methods.
Achievements:
Gross Annual Income: Increased from Rs 7 lakh to Rs 17 lakh by 2019.
Innovations: Implemented mixed and intercropping systems, reduced input costs, and adopted protected cultivation for high-value vegetables like capsicum and seedless cucumber.
Employment: Engaged more than 20 laborers with a three-tier human resource management system.
Additional Contributions: Established three vegetable shops in Sasaram, hosts field demonstrations, and organizes exposure visits for aspiring farmers.
Both Kumar and Singh exemplify how targeted support and innovative approaches can transform traditional farming into successful ventures.
Sudhir Kumar
Age: 38
Venture: Makhana Farming
Location: Village Tulasayahi, Panchayat Murli Basantpur, Block Kahra, District Saharsha
Educational Qualification: Intermediate
Institution Facilitating Venture: Mandan Bharati Agriculture College, Agwanpur
Sudhir Kumar began with low-scale makhana farming to boost his family's income. Initially growing makhana in a small area, his efforts led to significant expansion, increasing his income from Rs 20,000 to Rs 7.5 lakh annually. By adopting new techniques and high-yield varieties like Sabour Makhana-1, he saw further success. Integrating fish culture with makhana farming, he achieved net incomes of Rs 1.3 to 1.55 lakh per hectare annually. Kumar's success has inspired many local farmers to adopt makhana farming.

Satish Kumar
Age: 24
Venture: Sugarcane Farming and Juice Production
Location: Village Bhawanibigha, Panchayat Nanand, Block Silao, District Nalanda
Educational Qualification: Bachelor of Technology
Institution Facilitating Venture: Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK), Nalanda
Satish Kumar, a petroleum engineering graduate, shifted to sugarcane farming and juice production. Identifying a market gap for hygienically extracted juice, he returned to his village and began his venture in 2019. With the support of KVK, he employed innovative methods and equipment to produce and sell sugarcane juice. His business includes mobile e-rickshaws and fixed counters, generating a monthly net income of Rs 2.5 to 3 lakh. Kumar has secured a Rs 10 lakh loan under the PMEGP and plans to expand his business to Patna.

Alok Kumar
Age: 33
Venture: Protected and Open Cultivation
Location: Village Meghi, Panchayat Meghi Narma, Block Biharsharif, District Nalanda
Educational Qualification: M.Sc. (Horticulture)
Institution Facilitating Venture: Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK), Nalanda
Alok Kumar, with an M.Sc. in Horticulture, transitioned from academic research to practical farming. After returning to his village in 2017, he began cultivating gerbera flowers and capsicum using both protected and open methods. With support from KVK and government schemes, Kumar established a poly house and net house, achieving net incomes of Rs 4-5 lakh from gerbera and Rs 3-5 lakh from capsicum in his initial years. Despite setbacks due to the pandemic, Kumar remains optimistic about future growth and is exploring additional crops like papaya and strawberries.

Suresh Mukhiya
Age: 41
Venture: Fish and Makhana Farming
Village: Purikh, Sattarkataiya, Saharsa
Education: Matriculation
Facilitating Institution: KVK, Saharsa
Background: Born into poverty, Suresh Mukhiya faced financial constraints early in life. Unable to pursue further education, he took up farming to support his family. Initially growing conventional crops on 0.5 acres, Mukhiya struggled with limited income.
Transition: Inspired by KVK's advice, Mukhiya diversified into Integrated Farming System (IFS), including fishery, goatery, poultry, plantation, and makhana production. He leased 15 acres of land, where he began cultivating makhana and fish, later adding goat farming.
Achievements:
Income: Over ₹3 lakh annually from makhana, fish, and goat farming.
Production: Grows approximately 270 quintals of makhana and produces over 6 quintals of fish every four months.
Impact: Mukhiya’s success has influenced other villagers to adopt integrated farming, leading to better market access and increased production.

Deen Dayal Singh
Age: 31
Venture: Vegetable Farming through Relay Cropping
Village: Kuswaha Mohalla, Nasriganj, Rohtas
Education: Intermediate
Facilitating Institution: KVK, Rohtas
Background: Initially engaged in vegetable farming at 16, Deen Dayal Singh struggled with low income. His fortunes changed with the adoption of relay cropping, a method suggested by KVK.
Achievements:
Income: Approximate net income of ₹6.7 lakh annually.
Production: Grows a variety of vegetables including Bottle Gourd, Cucumber, Okra, and more, with significant yields per hectare.
Recognition: Awarded for his achievements at the Purvanchal Kshetriya Kisan Mela-2015.

Md. Tafazul
Age: 39
Venture: Pisciculture
Village: Sandalpur, Araria
Education: Matriculate
Facilitating Institution: KVK, Araria
Background: From working in brick kilns to farm labor, Tafazul transitioned to vegetable farming and later diversified into fish farming with the support of KVK.
Achievements:
Income: ₹8 to 9 lakh annually from both vegetable and fish farming.
Production: Cultivates various fish species, including Chital, Catla, and Rohu, across three acres of ponds.
Expansion: Increased pond area to five acres, with plans to grow Rupchanda and Pangasius for further income growth.

These profiles highlight the significant impact of diversification and support from KVK institutions on the livelihoods of these individuals.
1. Bandana Kumari
Name: Bandana Kumari
Age: 36 years
Venture: Dairy farming
Village: Merha
Panchayat: Jamdaha
Block: Katoriya
District: Banka
Educational Qualification: Graduation
Institution Facilitating Venture: Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK), Banka
Success Through Value Addition of Milk
Bandana Kumari, originally a homemaker, ventured into dairy farming in 2016 despite its male dominance. She was motivated by her father's background as a veterinary doctor and faced initial challenges in finding buyers for her milk.
Key Achievements:
KVK Support: Received guidance from KVK, Banka on increasing agricultural productivity and value addition.
Innovation: Developed a winnowing machine in 2012, winning the Mahindra Samridhi Award.
Training: Participated in a training program on milk product development organized by West Bengal University of Animal and Fishery Sciences in 2020.
Value Addition: Started producing paneer, whey drinks, curd, lassi, butter, and ghee.
Income Increase: Earnings increased from Rs 300 to Rs 450-650 per 10 kg of milk due to value-added products.
Community Impact: Trained 13 female farmers and facilitated marketing through a WhatsApp group.

2. Nagendra Prasad
Name: Nagendra Prasad
Age: 60 years
Venture: Basmati rice farming
Village: Baliyari
Panchayat: Paksai
Block: Pakri Barawan
District: Nawada
Educational Qualification: Graduation
Institution Facilitating Venture: Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK), Nawada
Effective Control of Pest Infestation with Organic Mixture
Nagendra Prasad is known for his innovative approach in pest control using an organic mixture. His experimentation has led to effective results in pest management and disease control.
Key Achievements:
Organic Mixture: Developed an effective organic mixture for pest control using neem bark, Aak leaves, tobacco stalk, and cow urine.
Experimentation: Successfully used the mixture in mustard, brinjal, and wheat crops.
Recognition: Received Kissan Bhushan Purskar in 2007 for producing high-quality Basmati rice.
Income: Gross income from Basmati rice cultivation is approximately Rs 400,000 per annum.
Cost Effectiveness: Organic mixture costs Rs 20-25 per liter, compared to Rs 250 for chemical pesticides.

3. Sanjit Kumar Kushwaha
Name: Sanjit Kumar Kushwaha
Age: 36 years
Venture: Lathyrus (grass pea) farming
Village: Manjhla Bigha
Panchayat: Behari Bigha
Block: Pandarak
District: Patna
Educational Qualification: Graduate
Institution Facilitating Venture: Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK), Agwanpur (Barh)
Revival of Forgotten Crop
Sanjit Kumar Kushwaha reintroduced the cultivation of lathyrus (grass pea), a forgotten crop, leading to significant income growth and community impact.
Key Achievements:
Revival: Reintroduced lathyrus cultivation in 2018 using new, low-ODAP varieties.
Income Increase: Net income from lathyrus farming ranged between Rs 24,000 to Rs 31,000 annually.
Market Impact: Sold lathyrus at Rs 3500 to Rs 4500 per quintal.
Community Impact: Motivated 15 farmers to start lathyrus cultivation, expanding area under cultivation to 25 acres.

Name: Sanjay Kumar Singh
Age: 50 Yrs
Venture: Dragon Fruit Farming
Village: Mahinathpur
Panchayat: Mahinath
Block: Kodha
District: Katihar
Educational Qualification: Intermediate
Institution Facilitating Venture: Krishi Vigyan Kendra, Katihar

Farming of Less Known Fruit Ensures Better Future for Katihar Farmer
Taking into consideration that dragon fruit is a relatively less known fruit in this region, there was risk involved for Sanjay Kumar Singh when he started growing dragon fruit. A farmer of Katihar district, Singh, however, went ahead with his plan of growing dragon fruit overlooking the uncertainties. The risk taken by him paid dividends. Singh received quite encouraging initial market response for his produce.
Primarily involved in farming of paddy, potato, banana, and vegetables earlier, Singh decided in 2018 to explore the possibility of growing dragon fruit. Singh was looking for options to replace banana cultivation to some extent with another economically viable fruit when he came to know about nutrient-rich dragon fruit through YouTube. Though a bit hesitant initially, he subsequently decided to go ahead with farming of dragon fruit. Hopeful of a good harvest of dragon fruit, Singh looks forward to increasing his income substantially in the future through farming this relatively lesser-known fruit.
Initially procuring 600 seedlings of dragon fruit from Kolkata at a rate of Rs 40 each, Singh started growing dragon fruit. Considering that dragon fruit plants are creepers, he erected a total of 230 cement poles in 10 Katha land out of his total five-acre agricultural land for growing the fruits. Singh planted four plants around each pole to facilitate proper growth and help the plants climb on cement poles.
In his attempt to experiment with the cultivation of a lesser-known fruit, he had the support of scientists and other personnel of Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK), Katihar. The KVK scientists extended him all required technical and scientific assistance. Singh was also provided supplementary information related to dragon fruit by KVK personnel.
He reaped a harvest of 6-7 kilograms of dragon fruit in 2019 from seedlings he had planted around a pole in 2018. In light of the fact that dragon fruit production is substantially more in the second and third year compared to the first year, the total quantity of his produce increased substantially in subsequent years.
The first year proved really challenging for Singh in terms of selling his produce. Due to the fact that dragon fruit is a less known fruit in the state, he was virtually at a loss on how to sell his produce. KVK's handholding support also helped him in making the fruit popular in the area. To make the fruit popular, Singh gave it free of cost to some important people, including doctors in his area, who in turn helped in the promotion of the fruit by stating its nutritional value to others. He also approached fruit sellers to sell his produce.
The efforts of KVK as well as his individual effort to popularize the fruit helped Singh sell his two quintals of produce from the first year at Rs 200 per kilogram. His earnings from the sale of his produce in the first year were much less compared to his input cost. The input cost of Singh included an expenditure of Rs 1000 he had to incur on erecting each cement pole apart from his expenditure on the purchase of seedlings. Though farming dragon fruit was not economically viable for Singh in the first year, he was sure the next year would be different for him.
In 2020, he had 10 quintals of dragon fruit with an average yield of 10-15 kilograms from plants around each pole. Following increased production, things started looking up for him. The second year also proved significant for Singh as he received a supply order for dragon fruit from the adjoining Purnia district apart from places in Katihar district. In the second year, he was also able to sell his produce at a rate of Rs 200 and above per kilogram. The dragon fruit, having an average shelf life of nearly one month, allowed him to contact more fruit sellers and people interested in dragon fruit. Singh registered a gross income of above Rs 2 lakh in the second year. His second-year income helped him recover his input cost to a great extent. Singh is hopeful that in succeeding years, he would have above 24 quintals of harvest of dragon fruit. He is confident that from the third year onwards, his net income from dragon fruit farming would increase considerably. Singh, who on average earns Rs 2 lakh annually from the cultivation of conventional crops, looks forward to doubling his income through dragon fruit farming.
The fellow farmers, in a number of cases, discouraged Singh initially regarding farming of the relatively less known fruit. However, influenced by his success, some farmers have already started dragon fruit farming. Taking together Kodha and Pothia blocks of Katihar district, more than half a dozen farmers have started farming dragon fruit. Many others are also contemplating growing dragon fruit in the future.

Name: Sameer Chaudhary
Age: 31 Yrs
Venture: Mushroom Farming
Village: Semapur
Panchayat: Bareta
Block: Barari
District: Katihar
Educational Qualification: Master of Business Administration
Institution Facilitating Venture: Krishi Vigyan Kendra, Katihar

Master of Business Administration Registers Success in Mushroom Farming
It was a course of destiny that Sameer Chaudhary had to take up agriculture as a livelihood. A Master of Business Administration (MBA), Chaudhary, however, has no remorse about being compelled by circumstance to select agriculture as his principal avocation. He has successfully established himself as a progressive farmer, despite having no previous experience in farming. The support of Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK), Katihar, significantly contributed to his success. He received all required scientific and technical support from KVK.
Chaudhary, who joined the navy after 10+2 level education, had to return home due to his father's illness. Following his return, he completed his bachelor and MBA courses in distance mode. Having nearly three acres of agricultural land, Chaudhary’s family had been traditionally involved in the farming of paddy and maize apart from banana. Since Chaudhary's father was a teacher in a government school, his family had to depend primarily on sharecroppers for carrying out farm activities. Chaudhary took overall charge of family farm activities in 2013 following his decision to pursue agriculture as a livelihood.
In pursuing agricultural activities, he observed that paddy farming was not proving to be much lucrative with net income from paddy cultivation remaining restricted to little more than Rs 5000. Comparatively, maize farming was proving profitable for Chaudhary with his net income from maize cultivation being more than Rs 50000 per annum. However, he was experiencing problems in sowing maize crops since the low-lying land in which he used to cultivate maize remained waterlogged for a long period. As post-monsoon, it took a long time for waterlogged land to become dry, Chaudhary mostly could not take up sowing of maize crops in time.
The problem he experienced in sowing maize crops in time led him to explore other options for supplementing his income. Chaudhary, who had been in contact with Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK), was suggested several measures by KVK scientists aimed at diversifying farm activities. Mushroom cultivation was among the ideas he was given by KVK scientists for supplementing income.
Chaudhary was initially a bit hesitant about starting mushroom farming. However, motivated by KVK scientists, he joined a training program on mushroom cultivation organized by NABARD in 2017. Subsequently, he also participated in a training program on mushroom cultivation organized at RAU, PUSA.
With scientific and technical assistance from KVK scientists, Chaudhary started micro-level mushroom farming in 2017. He began growing mushrooms in a small room of his house. The first-year produce was primarily for personal consumption. In fact, Chaudhary started commercial production of mushrooms in 2018. For large-scale production of both button and oyster varieties of mushrooms in 2018-19, he used nearly 500 separate bags for growing each of the varieties. Chaudhary was able to reap produce of 2-2.5 kg from each bag, which he sold at a price between Rs 130-180 per kilogram. Though he had no previous idea regarding what should be his strategy for selling mushrooms, he had no problem selling his produce. With purchasers from his village and outside starting to approach him, he had no problem in ensuring doorstep sell of his produce.
Taking into consideration the advice of scientists, Chaudhary also started value addition of mushrooms. He was extended technical support by KVK in value addition. Chaudhary dried a sizeable portion of his produce for preparing mushroom powder. He sold more than 10 kg of mushroom powder at a price between Rs 1000 to Rs 1100 per kg. Chaudhary also used mushroom powder for preparing biscuits. High in demand, he was able to sell 50 kg of mushroom biscuits at Rs 350 per kg. Chaudhary was in fact unable to meet the demand for biscuits. In 2018-19, he was able to register a net income of more than Rs one lakh through the sale of mushrooms and value-added mushroom products. Despite 2020 proving to be a lean year because of the pandemic, Chaudhary could earn around Rs 50000 through peak-season sale of mushrooms. Though off-season sales of mushrooms remained comparatively low in 2020, he was able to earn Rs 15000 despite constraints. With KVK support, Chaudhary looks forward to taking up mushroom farming as well as value addition of mushrooms on a big scale in the future. With his support, a female and a male farmer from

Umesh Mandal
Age: 70
Venture: Papaya Farming
Village: Sadhuwa
Panchayat: Sadhuwa Chapar
Block: Rangra Chowk
District: Bhagalpur
Educational Qualification: Literate
Institution Facilitating Venture: KVK, Sabour
Overview: Umesh Mandal, a farmer from Sadhuwa, transformed his agricultural life through papaya farming. Initially struggling with low returns from traditional crops due to soil erosion and floods, Mandal started experimental papaya farming in 2007. With support from KVK and Bihar Agricultural University, he expanded his papaya cultivation, achieving significant income growth. His current annual income exceeds Rs 10 lakh from both papaya farming and nursery operations. Mandal’s success has influenced many farmers in his region to adopt papaya cultivation.

Ranjan Sharma
Age: 43
Venture: Fish Farming
Village: Paharpura
Panchayat: Khadasin
Block: Bansi
District: Arwal
Educational Qualification: Matriculate
Institution Facilitating Venture: KVK, Arwal
Overview: Ranjan Sharma, a progressive farmer from Paharpura, diversified his farming activities to include fish farming. Initially growing conventional crops, Sharma expanded into capsicum and onion farming before venturing into pisciculture in 2016. Despite early challenges, he now manages four ponds and produces various fish species, including pangasius, Rohu, and Catla. His fish farming venture has significantly boosted his income to around Rs 6.5 lakh annually. Sharma’s success has encouraged others in his village and nearby areas to take up fish farming.

Bina Devi
Age: 42
Venture: Mushroom Farming
Village: Tikari
Panchayat: Dhoeri
Block: Tetiabamber
District: Munger
Educational Qualification: Literate
Institution Facilitating Venture: KVK, Munger
Overview: Bina Devi from Tikari village is renowned for her success in mushroom farming. After struggling with low family income, she began mushroom cultivation with training provided by Bihar Agricultural University and KVK, Munger. Starting with just 10 bags, her venture grew significantly, and she now earns over Rs 1.50 lakh annually from mushroom farming and allied activities. Bina Devi is recognized for her role in empowering women and is a leading trainer in mushroom cultivation. Her work has popularized organic mushroom farming in her area.

Binod Kumar Singh
Age: 58
Venture: Lathyrus Farming
Village: Nawada
Block: Sherghati
Panchayat: Srirampur
District: Gaya
Educational Qualification: Intermediate
Institution Facilitating Venture: Bihar Agricultural University, Sabour
Overview: Binod Kumar Singh, a progressive farmer from Nawada, diversified into lathyrus farming following encouragement from KVK scientists. Initially hesitant due to health concerns about lathyrus, he was persuaded by scientists that new varieties were safe and profitable. Singh’s first year of cultivation was successful, leading to increased income. Although he faced some challenges in subsequent years, he has expanded his lathyrus cultivation and influenced other farmers in his village and nearby areas. His current annual income from lathyrus farming ranges between Rs 2.5 lakh and Rs 3 lakh.
Sanjeev Kumar Choudhary
Age: 47 years
Venture: Aromatic plant farming
Village: Laxmipur Bhagwati
Panchayat: Laxmipur Bhagwati
Block: Kumarkhand
District: Madhepura
Educational Qualification: I. Com
Institution Facilitating Venture: KVK, Madhepura
Overview:
Sanjeev Kumar Choudhary began his farming career in 1994 with conventional crops (paddy, maize, wheat, jute) and later diversified into aromatic plants like mentha and lemon grass.
His venture into aromatic plants, supported by KVK, Madhepura, significantly increased his income.
He currently cultivates paddy and maize alongside mentha and lemon grass, and has also introduced banana cultivation.
His income has grown from Rs 1-1.5 lakh per year to Rs 9-10 lakh annually since incorporating unconventional crops.
Key Details:
Mentha: Grows on 5 acres, yielding 45 kg per acre with a net income of Rs 33,750 per acre. Input cost is Rs 11,250 per acre.
Lemon Grass: Grows on 1 acre, yielding 135 kg per acre with a net income of Rs 1,10,000 per acre. Input cost is Rs 25,000 per acre.
He supplies mentha and lemon grass oil to dealers and has mechanized units for oil extraction in his village.
Banana cultivation and reduced wheat cultivation due to rodent damage are part of his diversified approach.

Rupesh Kumar Choudhary
Age: 41 years
Venture: Farm Implement Bank
Village: Uprama
Panchayat: Katchapar Leelatari
Block: Rajoun
District: Banka
Educational Qualification: Graduate
Institution Facilitating Venture: KVK, Banka
Overview:
Rupesh Kumar Choudhary mechanized his farm activities and established a farm machinery bank, significantly increasing his income and promoting mechanized farming in his area.
He initially engaged in conventional farming, later adding mechanization tools such as rotavators, zero tillage machines, and happy seeders.
Key Details:
Farm Implement Bank: Provides farm machines to other farmers, generating a net income of over Rs 1.5 lakh per annum.
Micro Irrigation: Introduced and popularized micro irrigation systems in his village.
Seed Production: Produces paddy and wheat seeds with an average net income of Rs 35,000 per annum.
His overall net income from farming and machinery bank is approximately Rs 5 lakh per annum.

Dilip Kumar
Age: 47 years
Venture: Dairy farming
Village: Jhunathi
Panchayat: Nagwan
Block: Karpi
District: Arwal
Educational Qualification: Graduate
Institution Facilitating Venture: KVK, Arwal
Overview:
Dilip Kumar transitioned from a site manager job to dairy farming, supported by KVK, Arwal. Despite setbacks like Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD), he revived his dairy farm and significantly increased his income.
He now runs a milk cooperative society and engages in allied activities like growing green fodder and preparing vermicompost.
Key Details:
Dairy Farming: Started with 2 cows, now has 25 cows with an average milk production of 170 litres per day.
Net Income: Between Rs 4-4.5 lakh per annum.
Green Fodder: Cultivates Super Napier grass, reducing feed costs by Rs 80-85 per cow daily.
Biogas Plant: Uses biogas for cooking and plans to produce vermicompost and engage in organic farming.

Kumar Premchand
Age: 40 years
Venture: Integrated Fish Farming
Village: Madaripur
Panchayat: Tilauthu (West)
Block: Tilauthu
District: Rohtas
Educational Qualification: Matriculate
Institution Facilitating Venture: KVK, Rohtas
Overview:
Kumar Premchand ventured into integrated fish farming in 2015 and expanded significantly, increasing his income and diversifying into quail and poultry farming.
His success with integrated fish farming led him to develop multiple ponds and further diversify into other poultry ventures.
Key Details:
Fish Farming: Initially started with one pond, now has 11 ponds with a net income of Rs 15 lakh from pangasius fish farming.
Poultry: Engaged in quail farming with around 70,000 birds, producing a net income of Rs 6 lakh per annum.
Hatchery: Produces quail, duck, and kadaknath chicks, contributing to his substantial income.
Overall Income: Between Rs 15-20 lakh per annum.
Each of these farmers has successfully diversified their ventures, significantly increasing their income and contributing to their communities.
Swarn Sandhya Bharati
Age: 44 years
Venture: Mushroom Farming
Location: Khankitta, Sabour Block, Bhagalpur District
Education: Intermediate
Institution: Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK), Sabour
Overview: Swarn Sandhya Bharati transformed her life from a homemaker struggling with financial challenges to a successful mushroom farmer. Her journey began with training from KVK, which provided her with the necessary skills and support to start mushroom farming. Despite initial difficulties, she achieved significant success and recognition, including awards for her mushroom products. Bharati now grows mushrooms on over 2000 bags and produces high-demand value-added products. Her venture has provided her with a substantial income, and she actively supports and trains other women in her community to start mushroom farming.

Sandip Kumar
Age: 33 years
Venture: Goat Farming
Location: Mojahidpur, Amarpur Block, Banka District
Education: Graduate
Institution: Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK), Banka
Overview: Sandip Kumar transitioned from a software job in Delhi to self-employment through goat farming after the pandemic disrupted his previous job. With guidance from KVK, he started goat farming and has grown his herd to 30 goats. He uses a mix of stall feeding and grazing to optimize growth and reduce costs. Kumar plans to expand his grazing area and increase his goat stock, aiming for a net income of over Rs 1.5 lakh next year. His successful venture reflects a growing trend in his district towards goat farming as a viable livelihood option.

Gaurav Kumar
Age: 26 years
Venture: Nursery & Farming
Location: Lailak, Sabour Block, Bhagalpur District
Education: Graduate
Institution: Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK), Sabour
Overview: Gaurav Kumar blends his interest in agriculture with his aspiration for a government job. With support from KVK, he established a nursery and is cultivating papaya and marigold. His nursery focuses on growing mango, lemon, guava, and mahogany plants. Despite initial costs, Kumar has started recovering his investment and is optimistic about future returns. His nursery and farming ventures are expanding, showcasing his dedication to agriculture alongside his pursuit of a government job.
Satyendra Kumar
Name: Satyendra Kumar
Age: 41 years
Venture: Crop Diversification
Village: Chanduli
Panchayat: Pipraura
Block: Madanpur
District: Aurangabad
Educational Qualification: Matriculate
Institution Facilitating Venture: Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK), Aurangabad
Background and Success Story:
Initial Struggles: Started with menial jobs in Mumbai and Delhi after discontinuing education due to financial issues. Returned to his village in 2001 and began farming with 2.5 bigha land on lease.
Early Ventures: Initially grew tomatoes with support from KVK, which led to a net income of Rs. 35,000. Expanded into other vegetables but faced losses due to adverse weather.
Reinvention and Growth: Returned to farming in 2007 with 1.5 acres of land, focusing on turmeric cultivation with KVK's help, leading to a net income of Rs. 50,000.
Subsequent Ventures: Grew brinjal and capsicum in 15 bigha land, but faced challenges. Began papaya cultivation in 2012 with KVK support, resulting in a significant net profit of Rs. 4,500,000.
Expansion: Took on more land to cultivate white pumpkin, drumstick, and carom seeds. Added guava farming to his portfolio and now primarily focuses on guava and drumstick.
Current Status: Grows 600 tonnes of drumstick annually, supplies to markets in Kolkata and Patna, and expects a high yield from 32,000 guava trees. Planning to introduce jackfruit cultivation.

Anil Kumar
Name: Anil Kumar
Age: 34 years
Venture: Mushroom Spawn Production
Village: Bhagat Tola
Panchayat: Mathurapur
Block: Khagaria
District: Khagaria
Educational Qualification: Graduate
Institution Facilitating Venture: Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK), Khagaria
Background and Success Story:
Initial Challenges: Lost his job as Rojgar Sewak in 2012 and started farming with five bigha of land. Initially grew conventional crops like sugarcane, wheat, maize, and soyabean, but income was insufficient.
Transition to Mushroom Production: Explored mushroom spawn production with KVK's support. Set up a lab in November 2019 with an investment of Rs. 5 lakh. The lab can produce over 300 quintals of spawn per month.
Financial Outcomes: Faced reduced demand during the pandemic but averaged a net income of Rs. 20,000 per month in 2020. Current income from mushroom spawn production is better, and there is strong demand from local mushroom growers.
Future Plans: Intends to expand into button mushroom spawn production and commercial mushroom farming. Currently also grows conventional crops, generating additional income.
     Ranjan Paswan
Name: Ranjan Paswan
Age: 39 years
Venture: Animal Husbandry-Based Low-Cost Integrated Farming
Village: Parari
Panchayat: Bhikari Ghat
Block: Alauali
District: Khagaria
Educational Qualification: Middle Level School Education
Institution Facilitating Venture: Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK), Khagaria
Background and Success Story:
Early Challenges: Previously a daily wage earner, migrated to metropolitan cities for work after his father became bedridden. Returned to his village in 2016 due to insufficient income from his job.
Initial Steps: Attended a Kissan Choupal organized by Bihar Agricultural University (BAU) and received guidance from KVK. Started backyard poultry farming with 50 Vanraja chicks and later expanded.
Progression:
2016: Purchased 50 Vanraja chicks for Rs 1500. Faced initial losses but earned Rs 25,000 from selling chickens.
Subsequent Years: Expanded to 200 Vanraja chicks, earning approximately Rs 100,000 from egg and chicken sales.
2019: Began farming Kadaknath chickens, purchasing 100 chicks for Rs 9000. Net income was Rs 70,000 to Rs 80,000 from Kadaknath farming due to low costs and high meat prices.
2020: Started quail farming with 1000 quail chicks, earning Rs 10,000 from selling quail chicks. Established a hatchery and later received Sonali chicks for trial farming.
Breed Upgradation: Purchased male goats for breed upgradation, including a male African Boer goat for Rs 35,000. Earned Rs 50,000 annually from goat breed upgradation activities.
Dairy Farming: Established a small dairy with two cows as part of his integrated farming system.
Current Status: Earns more than Rs 25,000 per month from integrated farming. Plans to start a poultry feed preparation project with a government subsidy of Rs 10 lakh, requiring the employment of ten migrant laborers.

Contributors
Dr. Vinod Kumar - Sr. Scientist & Head, KVK, Araria
Dr. Anita Kumari - Sr. Scientist & Head, KVK, Arwal
Dr. Binay Kumar Mandal - Sr. Scientist & Head, KVK, Aurangabad
Dr. Brajendu Kumar - Sr. Scientist & Head, KVK, Banka
Dr. Arbind Kumar Sinha - Sr. Scientist & Head, KVK, Bhagalpur
Dr. S. B. Singh - Chief Scientist & Head, KVK, Amas, Gaya
Er. Manoj Kumar Roy - Sr. Scientist & Head, KVK, Manpur, Gaya
Dr. Muneshwar Prasad - Sr. Scientist & Head, KVK, Jehanabad
Dr. Kumari Sharda - Sr. Scientist & Head, KVK, Katihar
Dr. Bipul Kumar Mandal - Sr. Scientist & Head, KVK, Khagaria
Dr. Rajiv Singh - Sr. Scientist & Head, KVK, Kishanganj
Dr. Shambhu Ray - Sr. Scientist & Head, KVK, Lakhisarai
Dr. Surendra Chaurasiya - Sr. Scientist & Head, KVK, Madhepura
Mr. Mukesh Kumar - In-charge SS & Head, KVK, Munger
Dr. Seema Kumari - Sr. Scientist & Head, KVK, Nalanda
Dr. Reeta Singh - Sr. Scientist & Head, KVK, Patna
Dr. K. M. Singh - Sr. Scientist & Head, KVK, Purnea
Dr. Shobha Rani - Sr. Scientist & Head, KVK, Rohtas
Dr. Nityanand - Sr. Scientist & Head, KVK, Saharsa
Er. Pramod Kr. Choudhary - Sr. Scientist & Head, KVK, Sheikhpura
Dr. Manoj Kumar - Sr. Scientist & Head, KVK, Supaul
Dr. Ranjan Kr. Singh - Sr. Scientist & Head, KVK, Nawada
Note: The contribution of SMSs of all KVKs of BAU, Sabour, is highly acknowledged.


