Geographic and Hydrological Overview
The state of Bihar is divided by the river Ganga into two parts:
North Bihar with an area of 53.3 thousand sq. km.
South Bihar with an area of 40.9 thousand sq. km.
Besides the main Ganga stream, the state enjoys 14 river basins: Ghaghra, Gandak, BurhiGandak, Bagmati, KamlaBalan, Kosi, Mahananda, Karmnasa, Sone, Punpun, Kiul-Harhar, Badua, and Chandan. All these rivers drain into the main Ganga stream.
The six river systems from Karmnasa to Chandan, draining the southern part of Bihar, originate primarily from Indian territories in Bihar, Jharkhand, and Chhattisgarh, whereas seven river systems from Ghaghra to Mahananda drain North Bihar. Most of these river systems in North Bihar originate in Tibet and Nepal, and hence, they are international rivers. Excess rainfall in Tibet and Nepal directly affects the flow of these river systems, causing extensive floods in North Bihar, which has become a recurring phenomenon.
Agricultural Economy
Agriculture is the backbone of Bihar’s economy, employing 81% of the workforce and generating about 42% of the State Domestic Product. The state, with a geographical area of nearly 94.2 thousand sq. km, has the natural endowment of fertile soil, good rainfall, plenty of water resources, and agro-climatic conditions highly suitable for growing almost all types of crops three times a year. In Bihar, agriculture is not only the source of livelihood but also generates raw materials for agro-based industries, which has immense potential in the state.
Agro-Climatic Zones
On the basis of soil characterization, rainfall, temperature, and terrain, the state is divided into three main agro-climatic zones:
Zone-I: North West Alluvial Plains
Districts: East and West Champaran, Gopalganj, Siwan, Saran, Sitamarhi, Muzaffarpur, Vaishali, Madhubani, Begusarai, Sheohar, Darbhanga, and Samastipur.
Area: 32,665 sq. km
Average Annual Rainfall: 1234.7 mm
Soil: Mostly calcareous, with neutral, acidic, or saline soil found in the Northern part.
Zone-II: North East Alluvial Plains
Districts: Purnea, Katihar, Saharsa, Supaul, Araria, Kisanganj, Madhepura, and Khagaria
Area: 20,797.4 sq. km
Average Annual Rainfall: 1382.2 mm
Characteristics: Area full of streams with abandoned or dead channels of river Kosi. Frequent and sudden change of course has left small lakes and shallow marshes.
Zone-III: South Bihar Alluvial Plains
Districts: Bhagalpur, Banka, Munger, Jamui, Lakhisarai, Seikhpura, Gaya, Aurangabad, Jehanabad, Nawada, Arwal, Nalanda, Patna, Bhojpur, Buxar, Kaimur, and Rohtas.
Area: 40,875.5 sq. km
Average Annual Rainfall: 1102.1 mm
Soil: Mostly medium to heavy textured throughout the depth of the profile.
Tal, Diara, and Chaur Land
In the south of the natural levee of the Ganga, there is a vast stretch of backwater known as ‘Tal (low order monsoon stream)’ land extending from Buxar to Pakur in Jharkhand, where most of the rivers and rivulets coming from the south get lost. The estimated area under Tal is about 1.00 lakh ha. In addition to Tal land, the state has about 4.0 lakh ha of ‘Diara land (saucer-shaped flood plain of a river)’ under flood plains of river Ganga and Ghaghra. The state also has about 4.0 lakh ha of ‘Chaur land (remnants of river course)’, which is highly suitable for fish farming. The Tal, Diara, and Chaur land are inundated by water for varying periods and are difficult to manage.
Land Utilization Pattern
As per the census of 2002-03, about 61.18% of the area is under cultivation. The percentage of fallow land is 6.75%, compared to the corresponding figure for undivided Bihar prior to bifurcation, which was 42.77% and 16.02%, respectively. Following the creation of Jharkhand, forest area has dwindled to a meager 6.65% from 17.01%. The gross and net sown area in the state is 80.26 lakh ha and 56.38 lakh ha, respectively. The cropping intensity stands at 142%.
Operational Holding
As 77% of the state’s main workforce is employed in the agriculture sector, the average size of operational holding in Bihar is only 0.75 ha, against the national average of 1.41 ha (Govt. of India, 2005). The share of marginal holdings (less than 1 ha each) is as much as 82.9%. Marginal and small holdings account for about 59.8% of the total operated area.
Crop Production and Yield
In terms of the value of output of major crops in Bihar (Rs.3017) is a shade lower than that of all India (Rs.3576). Rice and wheat are the major crops of kharif and rabi seasons, occupying nearly 3.7 and 2.1 million hectares, respectively. Maize is cultivated in about 4 and 5 lakh ha during kharif and rabi seasons, respectively. The average yield of the rice-wheat cropping system is 1.45 – 2.19 t/ha, against the production potential of 4.5 – 5 t/ha. Similarly, the average maize yield of the state is about 2.38 t/ha against its yield potential of 6 t/ha. Despite the state being rich in soil and water resources, the average yield of rice, wheat, and maize is only about 32%, 44%, and 40%, respectively, of the potential yield.
There is considerable scope to increase the productivity of rice, wheat, and maize in Bihar. The state has high potential for the development of horticulture, production, processing, post-harvest management, and marketing under the National Horticulture Mission, which operates in 16 districts of Bihar. The state also produces about 2.6 lakh tonnes of fish annually. There are about 2 lakh hectares of permanent water area and 1.2 lakh hectares of seasonal water area in the state. Besides, nearly 5 lakh hectares of paddy area are under deep water conditions, which can be well exploited for fisheries. The fisheries sector contributes nearly 1.85% of the state’s GSDP.
Economic Significance
Agriculture is at the core of the state’s economy. The contribution of agriculture and its allied sectors to the state domestic product was 35 percent in 2007-08. Although this is a reduction from 48.5% in 1980, it remains among the highest in the country. During 1980-1992, agriculture and allied sectors in Bihar grew at 1.6 percent per annum compared to the national average of 3.1 percent. In fact, it was the lowest among most states. However, since 1993, growth in Bihar’s agricultural sector has accelerated. While the All India Agricultural GDP grew at 2.2 percent per annum between 1993-2003, the corresponding figure for Bihar was 2.7 percent, which was next only to West Bengal and Andhra Pradesh.
Challenges and Opportunities
Figures presented above adequately describe the poverty and low crop yields in Bihar. Hence, the goal of the agricultural production system is to maximize the income of land-owning and landless rural populace to improve their livelihood. This could be accomplished by increasing the income of the land-owning and landless rural population through increased production by enhancing productivity and intensity of farming and by generating more employment in agriculture and other rural-based production activities.
Simultaneous care also needs to be taken to preserve the health of land, water, and other natural resources so that the agricultural production system remains ever productive and sustainable. The area under fallow land needs to be progressively reduced, providing assured irrigation and other services. Special attention is also needed for Tal, Diara, Chaur, and saline areas to augment production of crops, horticulture, fisheries, and other commodities.
Agro-Ecological Situation
Agriculture in Bihar benefits from a favorable agro-ecological situation for the production of various field and vegetable crops, fruits, livestock, fish, honey, and other commodities. Bihar enjoys a monopoly in the production of litchi and makhana in the country, followed by honey and aromatic and medicinal plants. The annual average rainfall in the state ranges from 1100 mm to 1400 mm in different agro-climatic zones.
Besides a vast potential for surface irrigation, the state has utilized groundwater aquifers for irrigation purposes, covering about 43.47 lakh ha, which is only half of the exploitable groundwater potential for irrigation. North Bihar, constituting 56% of the state’s area, is risk-prone, and about one-third of the area is normally affected by floods every year. Nearly 10 lakh ha of land suffers from water stagnation for three to four months.
In 2007, about 215 lakh people in twenty-one districts were adversely affected by floods, and crops on an estimated area of 17 lakh ha were destroyed due to this natural disaster. In 2008, the unprecedented flood of Kosi created havoc in more than 14 districts, destroying kharif crops and assets worth Rs.100 billion, and a large number of laborers migrated out due to uncertainties of employment in agricultural activities.
Besides, Tal and Diara areas are spread over 12.5 lakh hectares, accounting for 20% of agricultural land in Bihar. The specific land situation is dominated by mono cropping and has specific problems of land, water, and crop management. In pulses production, there is ample opportunity, but the area under pulses declined by three lakh hectares during the last 15 years, and pulse productivity remained stagnant during the last 10 years. Despite comparatively higher net profit in pulses production compared to wheat production, farmers prefer to cultivate wheat due to lower risk. Moreover, there is a dearth of promising and pest-disease-resistant varieties of pulses in Bihar. Maize is the only crop that has performed well in Bihar, particularly the introduced winter maize. Winter maize is produced mainly for market purposes, though price fluctuations are common.
In Bihar, the irrigated crop area (59%) is higher than the corresponding national average (42%), but the per hectare productivity of almost all crops is lower than the national average. Despite a comparatively high proportion of irrigated area, the majority of farmers are not in a position to irrigate their crops adequately and timely due to the collapse of the canal irrigation system.
The use of chemical fertilizers in Bihar (156 kg/ha) is higher than the national average (115 kg/ha), but farmers use imbalanced quantities of nitrogen (N), phosphate (P₂O₅), and potash (K), resulting in poor crop responses to these nutrients. Poor response to chemical fertilizers might be due to a deficiency of micronutrients, particularly zinc, manganese, and sulfur in the soil. Assimilation of principal elements (NPK) in the crop is restricted due to this factor. Farmers are unaware of the benefits of balanced use of fertilizers and the deficiency of micronutrients in the soil.

ROLE OF KVKs OF BIHAR IN TRAINING OF FARMERS AND FARM WOMEN, RURAL YOUTH, AND EXTENSION FUNCTIONARIES
As a mandated activity towards human resource development, the KVKs of Bihar organized 5630 training programmes for 177,412 beneficiaries, including practicing farmers, farm women, rural youths, and extension functionaries during 2012-13.
Farmers and Farm Women Trained: 140,280
Courses Offered: 4154
In providing training to rural youths, 952 courses were offered for the benefit of 22,281 participants, whereas 524 courses were organized for 14,851 extension functionaries.
Caste-wise participation in the training programmes shows that 15.8% of the trainees were from the scheduled caste category. The analysis indicates that farmers of lower socio-economic status are increasingly approaching KVKs for their economic betterment through training. The major areas covered were integrated crop management, seed production, cropping system, integrated farming system, resource conservation technology, water management, nursery management, integrated pest management, rejuvenation of old orchards, gender mainstreaming through SHGs, integrated nutrient management, management of farm animals, livestock feed, and fodder production, etc. Both on-campus and off-campus courses were conducted by the KVKs as per the requirement of the clientele.
FRONT LINE DEMONSTRATIONS
In the rabi season, 484 demonstrations on selected oilseeds were carried out by the KVKs for an area of 144 ha. In pulse crops, demonstrations were conducted in 291 ha with the participation of 928 farmers. In kharif, an area of 107 ha was brought under pulse crop demonstrations involving 346 farmers. In crops like paddy, wheat, vegetables, etc., 2838 demonstrations were conducted by the KVKs in 831 ha. The total number of beneficiaries was 4600 both in rabi and kharif seasons of 2012-13.
Seed Replacement
Bihar agriculture is dominated by small landholders. About 96% of farm households have less than 2 ha of land and own 67% of agricultural land in Bihar. Marginal farmers constitute about 90% of total farm holdings and own about 43% of land in Bihar. The process of agricultural development among these farmers mostly lags behind as they do not have resources for the acquisition of modern agricultural technologies. Farmers have recently started using high-yielding varieties of seeds for principal crops like paddy, wheat, maize, pulses, oilseeds, and vegetables. However, the use of home-grown seeds by around two-thirds of the farmers is prevalent in Bihar. The state government, with the support of KVKs and state agricultural universities, has initiated an aggressive program for popularizing the use of quality seeds. This has resulted in the replacement of local cultivars in paddy to the extent of 30 to 35% through high-yielding varieties and 20 to 22% through hybrids. In wheat, 60 to 70% of local varieties have been replaced by high-yielding varieties, and in maize, 20 to 25% with composites. The most successful introduction has been observed in maize, which is expected to replace 90% of the local varieties through QPM. In pulses and oilseeds, the seed replacement rate was 25 to 30% during the year 2011-12, and in vegetables, 45 to 50%. Adoption of new technologies like the SRI method in wheat and rice, improved sugarcane cultivation methods, balanced doses of NPK, wheat management practices, and zero-tillage methods of sowing have significantly improved the average yield of crops.
HORTICULTURE DEVELOPMENT
Bihar has an important place in the area and production of fruits and vegetables in India. The state’s share in the area under fruits and vegetables in the country is estimated at 8.5% (2005-06). The area under fruits and vegetables covers about 10% of the gross cropped area but generates income of about 50% of the total value of all crops produced in Bihar. Bihar has a monopoly in the production of litchi and makhana, producing 70% of the total litchi production and 80% of makhana in the country. Mango is also an important fruit crop in Bihar, cultivated in approximately 1.4 lakh ha of land. Bihar constitutes about 7% of the area and 10% of the production of mango in the country, and per hectare mango productivity is higher in Bihar (8.75 tons/ha) than the national average of 6.14 tons/ha. Bihar is also a leader in banana production, producing 5% of bananas on 4% of banana area in the country. Potato is an important horticultural crop in Bihar, where the state ranks third in potato production and recently recorded the highest yield per hectare in Nalanda district in the country. Bihar has significant potential in potato production as well as in vegetables like cauliflower, cabbage, brinjal, tomato, lady’s finger, and cucurbits. Spices like chilies, turmeric, ginger, and garlic are grown on about 70 thousand hectares of land, accounting for more than 10% of the total production in the country. The state also has great opportunities to cultivate medicinal and aromatic plants. In this context, KVKs of Bihar are playing an important role in horticulture development by providing quality planting material of 233,500 numbers to the state government.
SEED PRODUCTION
KVKs took up seed and planting material production programs to improve the supply of quality seed and enhance the seed replacement rate of this zone as well as to enhance the production and productivity of major cereals, pulses, oilseeds, and other crops. During 2012-13, the KVKs of Zone-II produced 45,002.99 q of seeds, which were made available to 54,721 farmers. This seed production brought an amount of Rs. 697.0 lakhs as revenue to the KVKs. The KVKs of Bihar alone contributed 22,038.87 q of seeds for an estimated value of Rs. 2,85,33,594.
Among all the crops, the highest quantity (25,421.98 q) of seeds were produced in paddy with varieties including MTU-7029, Sahabagi, Navin, Lalat, Rajendra Masuri, Swarna Sub 1, MTU-1010, Anjali, BPT-5204, Abhishek, MTU 1001, and others. For the production of 7,776.64 q of quality seeds of wheat, the varieties identified by KVKs were HW 2045, HW 2824, PBW 711, PBW-343, HD-2733, CBW-38, K-9107, HUW-468, K-307, PBW-43, etc. In oilseeds, mustard was the most important crop for seed production, with 548.08 q of seeds produced, including varieties like Rajendra Anukul, Pusa Mahak, Rohini, Rajendra Sufalam, Pusa Agrani, Shivani, B-9, Pusa Jaikisan, NDR 8501, and others. In pulse crops, varieties like Subrata, Maitree, HUL-57, PL-406, Arun, Jul-57, PL-4, DPL-62, and DPL-15 were selected by the KVKs for the production of 578.4 q lentil seeds, followed by pea (291.19 q), black gram (282.14 q), and red gram (234.73 q). The KVKs also included commercial crops like potato and sugarcane for seed production, with 3,184.57 q and 4,573.38 q of seeds produced, respectively. For vegetables, the KVKs included almost all the vegetables for seed production, with the highest produce in onion (66.52 q) followed by tomato (10.16 q). The details of seed production in the zone are given in the following table to indicate the contribution of KVKs of Bihar in this sector.
PLANTING MATERIALS
Apart from producing seeds, the KVKs also took up programs on the production of planting materials at a large scale considering the needs of this zone with respect to vegetables, fruits, plantation crops, forest species, and others. Total planting materials produced during the year were 12.97 lakhs in number, which was equivalent to a revenue of Rs. 82.79 lakhs.
Among vegetables, seedling production was considered for tomato, cauliflower, brinjal, chili, cabbage, and capsicum. In tomato, 253,309 seedlings were raised, followed by brinjal (127,440), cabbage (104,897), chili (67,411), and capsicum (5,252).
In fruit crops, the highest number of saplings was prepared for mango (133,326), followed by papaya (95,719), guava (34,280), litchi (19,099), banana (6,520), and others. Production of planting materials also included ornamental plants like Croton, Ashok, medicinal and aromatic plants, plantation crops, spices, condiments, and forest species. The KVKs also produced planting materials of flowers including marigold, tuberose, chrysanthemum, and dahlia.
Planting Material Production in Bihar
KVKs in Accelerated Growth of Agriculture in Bihar and Jharkhand
With the technological support of State Agricultural Universities and guidance of Zonal Project Directorate vis-à-vis Indian Council of Agricultural Research, the KVKs of Bihar assessed a good number of technologies related to crop production, vegetable production, insect pest management, livestock rearing, and other relevant areas. Technologies found suitable for adoption were handed over to the extension mechanism, and feedback was sent to research organizations where modifications were needed. This process has definitely strengthened the ongoing efforts of the state government in improving the agricultural scenario of Bihar. Technologies which have found place in a large number of farmers' fields are given below:
System of Root Intensification Method for Rice Cultivation
Different KVKs assessed the effect of the SRI technique in rice cultivation. It was observed that the complete SRI technique produced higher yield along with higher net return in comparison to traditional practices. Through this technique, there was overall improvement in the number of tillers (per hill 30%), effective tiller per hill (25 to 30%), yield increase to the extent of 40%, followed by a 40% increase in net profit compared to traditional practices, along with saving of water and proper weed management in rice crop. In SRI method, 12-day-old rice seedlings are planted at a spacing of 25 cm x 25 cm against traditional transplantation of 30-day-old seedlings, resulting in higher yield and higher return.
Application of Zero Tillage
The assessment of zero tillage in enhancing profitability of wheat and paddy cultivation followed by timely sowing of wheat, conducted by KVKs, led to scaling up the technology across the entire state in collaboration with line departments and ATMA. The results of zero tillage showed that a 52% and 22% increase in yield in wheat and paddy, respectively, could be achieved over the conventional system.
Zero Tillage in Wheat Sowing
Introduction of vibrant Resource Conservation Technology (RCT), ZTT in Rice-Wheat dominated cropping system brought a drastic change in wheat yield. KVKs introduced ZTT in 2005 in a small area of about 5 ha only, and now it is being used in an area of about 1.00 lakh ha. It not only reduced sowing cost by about Rs. 2,500/ha but also advanced the sowing by 12-15 days and increased yield by up to 12% compared to the conventional method. Reduction in the cost of land preparation, seed, labor, weed management, irrigation, etc. led to nearly 65% more income for farmers than the conventional method.
Sahbhagi – A Promising Rice Variety for Drought-Prone Areas
To cope with scanty rainfall during the onset of kharif, an improved drought-tolerant and short-duration paddy variety, Sahbhagi, has been successfully introduced in drought-prone districts of Bihar, particularly in agro-ecological Zone IIIB. Due to the erratic nature of monsoon, drought is particularly frequent in rainfed uplands and shallow lowlands of Bihar. Average productivity is less than 1.5 t/ha in rainfed upland and less than 2 t/ha under shallow lowlands. The introduction of the Sahbhagi variety provided a yield advantage of 0.5 t/ha under moderate stress and 1.0 t/ha under severe drought conditions over traditional varieties of paddy and yielded at par with irrigated control conditions. The variety is resistant to leaf blast and moderately resistant to brown spot and sheath blight.
Rejuvenation of Guava Orchards
Decline in productivity of guava trees occurs largely due to poor photosynthetic efficiency, besides several other compounding factors including the age of the tree, dense and intermingling branches, neglected and poor management of orchards, etc. Penetration and interception of sunlight in the canopy are greatly affected due to intermingling and overcrowding branches, leading to low productivity. KVKs have taken the initiative through FLD and training to rejuvenate old plants in 2012. Undesired and overcrowded branches are pruned to ensure better light penetration, improving photosynthesis and flowering capacity. Thus, productivity of guava increased by 9.37% through various training and FLD in the district. About Rs. 50,000/ha profit is being achieved by increased yield.
Green Manuring in Kharif Paddy
Indiscriminate use and application methods of chemical fertilizer in Rice-Wheat cropping systems have started reducing soil productivity and health. To maintain soil productivity and health, the addition of leguminous crops is being propagated among farmers, which, on incorporation into soil, increases nutrient supply capacity, organic matter, microbial population, and also neutralizes pH. KVKs introduced green manuring (GM) in 2010 through various training and FLD in districts. It was found that GM saves about 39 kg N in paddy crop. Due to increased yield and soil health, this technology has spread to a vast area of paddy-producing districts.
Zero Tillage in Lentil for Tal Area of Bihar
Tal is a unique land situation in Bihar, which is monocropped and only lentil is cultivated in the rabi season. The clay soil of Tal area makes it difficult to plough, and if sowing is not completed within the shortest possible time, the soil becomes very hard due to fast loss of moisture. Being bowl-shaped and situated behind natural cleaves, drainage of water is dependent on evaporation only. Zero tillage in sowing lentil promoted by KVKs has performed exceedingly well in the Tal area and has been widely adopted by the farmers of Tal area in Bihar. Paira cropping is a dominant practice in lentil cultivation in some districts of Bihar. In low-lying areas (commonly known as ahar), lentil is sown after the depletion of soil moisture in the last week of October to November. In heavy clay soil, large clods form during field preparation. Application of zero tillage has not only made it possible to cultivate lentil but also produced nearly 200% more yield.
Direct Seeded Rice by Zero Tillage for Resource Conservation
Rice cultivation in Bihar during kharif is highly dependent on rain, which delays nursery raising, transplanting, and sowing of succeeding crops like wheat. Moreover, rice being a water-loving crop, yield is influenced by the availability of irrigation throughout the growing period. Shortage of labor, particularly during land preparation and transplanting, further aggravates the problem, and consequently, the cost of cultivation goes up. Direct seeding of rice through zero till-cum-seed drill is an effective means to overcome the problems of rice cultivation during moisture stress situations. The KVKs have successfully demonstrated the technology with a reduction in water (15 to 20%) and labor requirements. Higher rice yield has also been recorded to the extent of 39 percent with enhanced profitability.
Cultivation of Kharif Onion for Higher Profitability
Heavy rain in the pre-monsoon period followed by a long dry spell during the monsoon period has been a common feature in the last two years in most of the districts of Bihar. The erratic climatic conditions during the monsoon have forced farmers to take another crop in fallow land or a smaller portion of their main crop land. KVKs have conducted FLDs on kharif onion. Introduction of this alternate crop in kharif by the KVKs has helped a good number of farmers in getting adequate remuneration.
Vermi-Compost
To minimize the use of chemicals in agriculture operations, KVKs have put their efforts into producing bio-fertilizers, bio-agents, etc. The KVKs, through their training and demonstration programs, have involved young farmers in vermi-compost-based enterprise development followed by large-scale production by small farmers for its use, mainly in vegetable crops. This has also resulted in the effective utilization of farm waste/agricultural waste for the benefit of the overall agricultural environment.
Azolla Culture
Presently, a few KVKs, namely Samastipur and Vaishali, have introduced azolla culture for increasing rice production. Azolla culture fixes atmospheric nitrogen in rice fields, which results in a significant increase in rice yield. The dry azolla has been utilized for livestock also to enhance milk productivity.
Papaya Intervention
Papaya (Carica papaya) is a very important fruit crop grown commercially in the Begusarai district. It is one of the best crops that flower and fruit throughout the year. This is highly profitable to farmers. Before the attempts made by KVK, the cultivation of papaya was almost nil in Begusarai. The KVK has introduced the papaya variety, Red Lady. It is a high-yielding variety with good market value and keeps farmers in good profit. KVKs have trained farmers on the cultivation of this variety, and now it has gained significant popularity among farmers in the district.
Improvement in Sheep Rearing
The indigenous sheep rearing practice has been modified to improve the yield of milk and meat production. This has led to an increase in milk yield from 400 liters per year to 550 liters per year and meat yield from 15 to 20 kg per year. Farmers have also been encouraged to adopt improved breeds of sheep which are more productive.
Turmeric Cultivation
Turmeric cultivation was introduced in the state through KVKs in districts such as Darbhanga and Samastipur. The variety adopted has shown good results with increased yield and market value. The technology was spread among the farmers through FLDs and training programs, resulting in higher profitability.

KVKs in Accelerated Growth of Agriculture in Bihar and Jharkhand
Role Played by KVK Towards Agricultural Development in Jharkhand
Background:
Jharkhand as the 28th State of Indian Union got recognition on the 15th November, 2000. The state of Jharkhand, formerly a part of Bihar, extends between 22 degrees North to 25.5 degrees North latitudes and 83 degrees East and 87.75 degrees East latitudes. The total geographical area of Jharkhand is 79,714 sq.km surrounded by Bihar in the North, West Bengal in the East, Odisha in the South, and Chattisgarh in the West. The state is located on an elevation of 300 to 610 msl and the climate ranges from dry semi-humid to humid semi-arid types. Jharkhand is largely comprised of the forest tracks of Chhotonagpur plateau and SanthalPargana with a total forest area of 23.32 lakh ha which covers 29.26 percent of the geographical area of the state and much above the national average of about 18 percent.
The state has 24 districts, 212 blocks, and 32,260 revenue villages to house a population size of 32,988,134 (census 2011). Distribution of population in rural and urban areas indicates that 25,055,073 persons live in rural areas and the rest 7,933,061 in urban areas. Of the total population, 70 percent depends mainly on agriculture and allied activities for their livelihood, contributing about 15 percent to the Gross Domestic Product.
The state of Jharkhand comes under Agro-climatic Zone VII i.e. Eastern Plateau and Hill Region. This region is further divided into three zones namely, Central and North Eastern Plateau, Western Plateau, and South Eastern Plateau zone. The state falls in zone 12 and 13 as per agro-ecological characterization of the country. Central North Eastern Zone has the highest total geographical area (4.1 m ha), net cultivated area (55%), and least forest area (13%) whereas South Eastern Plateau has minimum total geographical area (1.3 m ha), 31.6 percent of net cultivated area, and 24.0 percent forest area. The highest forest area is available in Western Plateau (33%) followed by 2.5 m ha total geographical area and 24 percent net cultivated area.
Out of the total 79.71 lakh ha of total geographical area, total cultivable land is 38.0 lakh ha but the net sown area is 25.75 lakh ha. Current fallow and other fallow constitute 8.87 and 6.75 lakh ha, respectively whereas 5.74 lakh ha land is barren in nature. Land put under non-agricultural use is 6.87 lakh ha and cultivable waste land accounts for 2.74 ha. Irrigated land area is 3.007 lakh ha and the cropping intensity is 116 percent. Annual precipitation in the plateau and sub-plateau region is 1400 mm on average, of which nearly 83 percent is received during June to September and the rest in remaining months. A number of perennial rivers and streams flow through the state and the important rivers are Damodar, Subarnarekha, KoelKaro, Barakar, and Sankh. Natural forest and mineral reserves are the most important resources of this state. It ranks first in the production of coal, mica, kyanite, and copper in the country.
Granite gneiss and granite schists are the major constituents of developing soil in this region accounting for 32.6 and 14.2 percent, respectively. Soil salinity on flooding is an unknown problem in this region. However, the problem of soil acidity (pH< 5.5) is quite acute which affects 4 lakh hectares of cultivated area. Sheet and gully erosion are the major causes behind the loss of soil and plant nutrients as the land surface is uneven and undulating. This has resulted in severe erosion every year to the extent of 23 lakh hectares of land.
Food security situation in the state of Jharkhand is very precarious. In spite of being bestowed with huge natural resources, 40 percent of the population of the state live below the poverty line. World Food Programme mapping has listed the state as one of the lowest in the ladder of development indicators. According to National Survey II, about 2 percent of the population suffers from acute and chronic hunger and 10 percent from seasonal food insecurity. Nearly 70 percent of the population depends on small farmland less than 1 hectare size. Hence, stabilizing agriculture for small and marginal farmers along with looking for livelihood options in the state is one of the greatest challenges which should be addressed with utmost seriousness and sincerity.
Year-wise Growth of KVK in Jharkhand
There are 23 KVKs in the State of Jharkhand of which 16 are operating under the control of BAU, Ranchi and 7 belonging to different NGOs, ICAR Institute, and District Administration. Four KVKs, namely, Ranchi, Hazaribag, Deoghar, and West Singhbhum, are working in the State since a long time. However, the remaining 19 KVKs are relatively new. The year-wise growth of KVKs in Jharkhand is presented graphically.
The KVKs, through their mandated activities namely, technology assessment, technology refinement, demonstrations, trainings, and extension activities as well as production of critical inputs like seeds, planting materials, etc., have played a very significant role in agricultural development in respective district technology-wise details are as follows:
In the State of Jharkhand, as a whole, 2,263 numbers of training programmes were offered to 59,801 beneficiaries during 2012-13. Farmers and farm-women trained were 44,623 covering 1,589 courses. Rural youth trained were 8,604 during the period covering 410 number of courses. While extension functionaries were trained through 264 number of courses involving 6,574 beneficiaries.
Caste-wise participation in the training programmes shows that in Jharkhand, the participation of farmers including farm women from the schedule tribe category was to the extent of 39 percent but from the schedule caste category, it was 24.9 percent. The analysis indicates that farmers of lower socio-economic status are steadily approaching KVKs for their betterment through training. The major areas covered were integrated crop management, seed production, soil and water conservation, soil fertility management, cropping system, integrated farming system, resource conservation technology, water management, nursery management, integrated pest management, rejuvenation of old orchards, gender mainstreaming through SHGs, integrated nutrient management, management of farm animals, livestock feed and fodder production, etc.
Both on and off-campus courses were conducted by the KVKs as per the merit and requirement of course content.
In Jharkhand, 1,121 demonstrations covering 162 ha in rabi oilseeds, 253 demonstrations in 59 ha in kharif oilseeds were conducted. In both rabi and kharif pulse, Jharkhand took the lead with 314 and 710 demonstrations, respectively. The total area coverage in rabi was 47 ha and kharif 148 ha, in pulses. In crops like paddy, wheat, vegetables, etc., 2,484 demonstrations were made in 589 ha. The total number of beneficiaries was 4,882 in rabi and kharif season 2012-13.
Seed Production
Availability and accessibility of quality agricultural inputs at an affordable price are the prerequisites for the development of agriculture. Production of quality seed, the most important agricultural input, needs to be augmented for the state of Jharkhand to bring about the desired change in the present agricultural scenario. However, inadequacy of quality seeds is one of the major bottlenecks in enhancing productivity. KVKs had taken up the seed production of crops like wheat, lentil, paddy, mustard, chickpea, and vegetables which includes hybrid seeds of paddy, wheat, and vegetables, for ensuring proper supply of quality seeds to the farmers.

 Livestock Rearing
The state of Jharkhand has high potential for prospering in the livestock sector with assured scientific knowledge of rearing, improved foundation stock, and regular vaccination. Among the livestock reared, pig, goat, and poultry at the backyard level can create opportunities to provide employment to seasonally employed rural farmers and supplementary income to improve their living standards. In assessing the feasibility of large-scale backyard livestock rearing, the KVKs have provided the knowledge of scientific livestock farming with T&D breed of pig, Black Bengal goat, and Divyayan Red/Vanraja/Gramapriya poultry breeds. Along with scientific management, the KVKs have also provided low-cost housing made with locally available resources, low-cost feed made with local ingredients, and large-scale vaccination camps at regular intervals. The efforts of KVKs have not only empowered the farm women of the state but also made the T&D breed of pig immensely popular in Purulia, Birbhum, and Bankura districts of West Bengal.

Promotion of Appropriate Crop Varieties
Rice Varieties for Upland and Medium Land
The KVKs put their efforts into promoting several rice varieties for upland and medium land situations, such as Anjali, Vandana, Birsa Vikas Dhan-101, and Birds Vikas Dhan-110. The performance of the varieties promoted in the districts of Bokaro, Chatra, Dhanbad, East & West Singhbhum, Lohardaga, Latehar, Dumka, Hazaribag, Ranchi, and Gumla has shown an increase in productivity to the extent of 72-80 percent with more than 30 percent profitability. In most of the districts, the expansion of area under the promoted varieties has also taken place to nearly 30 percent.
In medium land situations, the introduced varieties namely Naveen, Sahabhagi, Abhishek, and Lalat have recorded 25-35% more productivity with 30 percent profitability. In almost all the districts, nearly 50 percent of the land has been brought under these varieties.
In wheat, introduced varieties like K-9107, DBW-14, DBW-17, and DBW-39 for normal sown irrigated conditions in the districts of West Singhbhum, Giridih, Palamu, Sahibganj, Jamtara, Ranchi, Saraikela, Pakur, and Garhwa have helped in enhancing wheat productivity to the extent of 30-35 percent followed by 25 percent profitability. Area expansion has also taken place by 20 percent under the identified varieties.
In pigeon pea, varieties like ND-1, Asha, Malviya, Birsa Arhar-1, and ICPH-2671 introduced by KVKs in the districts of Bokaro, Dhanbad, Lohardaga, Latehar, West Singhbhum, Giridih, Palamu, Sahibganj, Dumka, Ranchi, Garhwa, Hazaribag, Godda, Gumla, and Koderma have shown an increased productivity of 60-70 percent. The performance of the varieties has also helped in bringing more areas (30%) under the varieties with profitability of nearly 30 percent.
Sizeable marginal and barren land in the districts of Dhanbad, Bokaro, Giridih, Latehar, Lohardaga, Saraikela, East & West Singhbhum, Godda, Gumla, Hazaribag, and Ranchi could be brought under Niger cultivation by the KVKs with the introduction of varieties BN-1, JNC-6, and Puja. Nearly 10-12 percent of the existing barren land is now occupied through Niger cultivation with increased productivity and profitability to the extent of 45-50 and 20 percent, respectively.

Lac Cultivation
Lac rearing and cultivation is a traditional occupation and an important source of income for thousands of poor tribal families. However, the potential of lac cultivation has not yet been tapped to provide the desired benefit to the tribal. The KVKs of Jharkhand have introduced lac cultivation technology including improved breeds of Rangini and Kusumi, insect-pest and disease management, processing, etc., in the districts of Palamu, Lohardaga, Chatra, Bokaro, Saraikela, East Singhbhum, and Gumla. The KVKs also imparted training to lac rearers and exposed them to scientific lac cultivation practices at IINRG, Ranchi. The efforts of the KVKs helped the tribal farmers enhance profitability to the extent of 60 percent with the adoption of scientific practices.

Multi-Layer Vegetable Cropping System
Farmers of the Nipania village (Godda Block) have been cultivating cucurbits since long by making a structure of bamboo and thread (locally called machan) during the rainy season to spread the vines. In this way, the land below the machan was lying vacant. GVT-KVK, Godda has demonstrated the cultivation of Elephant Foot Yam (EFY) (var.-Gajendra-1) below the multilayer (EFY+Bitter gourd). Three cucurbits viz. ridge gourd, bottle gourd, and bitter gourd were grown along with EFY. The maximum C
Ratio of 1:4.1 was recorded in the case of EFY+bitter gourd, while in the case of sole cropping of bitter gourd it was only 1:1.6. This technology has spread across 16 acres in the district.

Protein Security Through Pulse Cultivation on Bund
Adoption of practices like the selection of a short-duration variety of pigeon pea (var.-Nirmal-2), quality seeds, and optimum crop geometry (60x20 cm) under a paired row system has been demonstrated by GVT-KVK, Godda due to the prevalence of low land in Godda Block. Pigeon pea cultivation was difficult because of water logging in the main field. Therefore, the demonstration was conducted to grow pigeon pea on the bund of rice fields. Presently, about 1025 ha of land has been brought under this type of cultivation. Pigeon pea sown on the bund of the rice field, with a seed rate (1 kg/ha), resulted in good plant population, seed yield (96 kg/ha), straw yield (5.2 q/ha), and a net profit of Rs 6620/ha. Besides, the net profit, it has been found useful to fulfill the need for pulses for household consumption, fuel, and compost. It also serves as fencing against grazing animals.

Intercropping of Mango-Based Sugar Cane
Generally, farmers do not take any type of crops in the orchard in our district. During the training programs, KVK Godda has suggested taking intercrops in the space between mango plants to get additional yield from the orchard. It has been observed that during the 1st year of orchard establishment, the LER was approximately 1, while it was about 1.2 in the 4th year of the orchard, and after 8 years, it was about 1.4. The space utilized by the mango plant after 8 years is 35%, and the rest of the area is covered by sugar cane. In a sole mango orchard, the total yield of mango fruit was obtained at 85 q/ha, while in the case of intercropping with sugar cane, the yield of mango fruit was recorded at 92 q/ha due to regular application of manuring and watering. Besides the mango crop, the farmer also harvested 482 quintals of sugar cane in one hectare area. Presently, more than 1000 acres of newly established mango orchards are intercropped with sugar cane.

Other Initiatives by the KVKs of Bihar and Jharkhand
Brown Manuring
Pre-germinated paddy seed (@25 kg/ha) was broadcast along with sesbania (@30 kg/ha) in soil after giving one shallow ploughing. One-fourth of 75% recommended N (80 kg/ha) and 75% recommended P and K (40 kg/ha) were applied as basal. No herbicide was used before sowing. Half of the 75% recommended N was applied 45 days after sowing (DAS), and the rest was applied at 70 DAS. Herbicide 2,4-diethyl ester was applied two times, one after 30 DAS and another at 45 DAS. Sesbania was fully destroyed at 55 DAS. Water management was done in a conventional manner. It was found that productivity increase due to brown manuring was marginal (1.3%) which may not favor brown manuring over the conventional method of cultivation. However, when the benefit-cost ratio is considered, brown manuring was found to be much more effective over the conventional method in diminishing the cost of cultivation (B
ratio of 1.15 compared to 0.74 in conventional). The main reason for the diminished cost of cultivation was less due to reduced fuel requirement for main field preparation. Also, the labor requirement was less in brown manuring (152 nos.) compared to conventional (170 nos.) practice. Brown manuring has another advantage in regards to soil quality preservation and remediation. In conventional rice cultivation, puddling has to be done to break down soil aggregates, reduce macro-porosity, disperse the clay fraction, and form a dense zone of compaction (i.e., ‘plough pan’) at depth. In addition to facilitating transplanting, puddling serves several functions including weed control and reduction in deep percolation losses of water.
Paddy cum Daincha has been demonstrated in an area of 25 ha in Bihar and 35 ha in Jharkhand. The Paddy cum Daincha seeder recorded an average yield of 4950 kg/ha, which was 13.0% higher compared to the local check (Jaya).

Women Empowerment
The contribution of women in Indian agriculture is well recognized, though benefit sharing is not uniform in most cases. Considering the needs of the household, farm women remain engaged in income-generating activities, sacrificing their leisure periods. The farm women, either individually or in groups, mobilize scanty resources for the economic betterment of their families. The KVKs of Bihar and Jharkhand have contributed towards the socio-economic empowerment of a large number of farm women. The major initiative has been providing adequate knowledge and skills in agriculture as well as post-harvest technology including value addition, backyard livestock rearing, poultry rearing, handicrafts making, mushroom cultivation, vermicompost production, etc. In addition, the KVKs have formed a significant number of self-help groups (SHGs) on various enterprises along with providing support to SHGs formed by other organizations. In the process, visible changes in the economic condition of the farm women have been observed.

Natural Resource Management
Natural Resource Management through in-situ moisture conservation, land shaping & RWH, green manuring, 5% model of irrigation, crop residue management, aerial vegetable cultivation, bunding of field, BBF, soil conservation, soil test-based nutrient application, micro-irrigation techniques, compost pits, construction/renovation of new water harvesting and recycling structures, farm ponds/check dams/tank roof water harvesting tanks have been carried out by the KVKs of Bihar and Jharkhand. Some salient achievements of NRM activities are mentioned hereunder:
Improving the Resilience of Poor Farmers by Reclaiming Cultivable Wastelands at Nawada, Bihar: The cluster of villages Vidyasagar & Gadimajhila, Nawada, is predominantly inhabited by Rajvanshi and Ravidas communities. The undulated lands are located in the fringe areas of forests and not cultivated despite being fertile. These were completely unprotected from grazing animals, and rainwater harvesting and storage structures (ahars) could not convey water due to their higher elevation. The cultivable fallow was brought back into crop production by motivating the community to participate in reclaiming the lands by bunding and leveling. About 15 ha was planted with pigeon pea during kharif, leading to a harvest of 10,000 kg of pigeon pea worth Rs. 3,50,000/-. For the first time, the farmers of these villages could realize such a harvest, helping them appreciate the worth of their land.
De-silting of Irrigation Channels for Coping with Water: The time required for irrigating one ha was brought down to 4.8 hr from 8 hr. This resulted in bringing 4 ha additionally under paddy. This generated an additional 600 man-days of work. It also saved enough water to provide one supplementary irrigation of 5 cm over 15 ha. The additional 4 ha brought under paddy could yield about 10 t worth Rs. 1.0 lakh.
Water Security by Renovation of Abandoned Open Wells: So far, 28 wells have been renovated in this cluster of villages. The villagers are very happy with this intervention as it has ensured drinking water availability even in the midst of summer. The drainage line has also been developed, leading to safe disposal of water, improving hygiene around the wells. Overall, the well renovation intervention has been very well accepted by the villagers.
Renovation of Ahar: Around 100 ha area was brought back into cultivation.
Sand Bag Check Dam - A Story of Success Against Fitting Climatic Variability at Gumla: A low-cost temporary structure was made on a river of 50-meter length. A huge quantity of water was reserved for supplemental and drinking (animal) purposes. The water table has risen by 44%, followed by area expansion under off-season vegetable cultivation in 10.0 ha, summer paddy cultivation in 10.0 ha, wheat cultivation in 50.0 ha, and safe harvesting of standing paddy from 30.0 ha during acute scarcity of rainwater. Monocropping has turned into double and in some cases multiple cropping in the village.
Replication of Intervention of Temporary Low-Cost Water Harvesting Structure: Huge available water not utilized properly. Inclined to cultivate double or multiple crops in more than 30 ha. Ensuring the paddy seed production in 10 acres of land which helped in sustaining the seed bank.

Production Module
Demonstrations include introducing drought and flood-tolerant paddy varieties, advancement of planting dates of crops, community nurseries for delayed monsoon, location-specific intercropping systems, brown manuring, promotion of pulses utilizing post-monsoon rainfall, integrated crop/pest/disease management, and growing vegetables as contingency crops.
Technology Demonstration and Impact
Technology Demonstrated
Drought Tolerant Varieties
The drought tolerant varieties demonstrated include Sahbhagi, Anjali, A 404, Naveen, and Abhishek. The area covered was 185, with 899 farmers benefiting. The percentage increase ranged from 16.8 to 150.5.
Flood Tolerant Varieties
The flood tolerant varieties demonstrated were Swarna Sub 1 and Sabita. The area covered was 64, and 23.5 farmers were covered. The percentage increase ranged from 22 to 33.5.
Advancement of Planting Dates
Advancements in planting dates for crops such as wheat, lentil, and mustard were implemented over an area of 53.4. A total of 246 farmers were covered, with a percentage increase ranging from 31 to 231.5.
Staggered Community Nurseries
Staggered community nurseries for crops including paddy, brinjal, cauliflower, and tomato covered an area of 19.3. The number of farmers covered was 85, with a percentage increase ranging from 11.3 to 24.3.
Location-Specific Intercropping
Location-specific intercropping was applied over an area of 48.3, benefiting 321 farmers. The percentage increase ranged from 55.5 to 134.6.
Crop Diversification
Crop diversification efforts covered an area of 88.4, with 534 farmers involved. The percentage increase ranged from 26.0 to 68.8.
Brown Manuring
Brown manuring was practiced over an area of 25.0, involving 95 farmers. The percentage increase ranged from 12.2 to 16.0.
Note: One of the important interventions has been the promotion of community nursery for paddy as an approach to contingent availability of seedlings during drought or flood in the NICRA adopted village(s). Seedlings were raised by sowing seeds at 15-day intervals in three stages, and farmers were allowed to take as many seedlings as they could transplant depending on rainfall conditions.
Livestock and Fisheries Demonstration Programme
The livestock and fisheries demonstration programme includes breed up-gradation, balanced feed and fodder management through mineral mixture, feed blocks, and silage making, azolla feeding, and breed animal health management through deworming and vaccination. It also focuses on improved shelters for animals, fish pond cleaning, fish farming, pig farming, and clean milk and fodder production. Improved cross-ventilated poultry, dairy, and goatary sheds were introduced, with improved poultry sheds featuring well-ventilated systems to reduce mortality rates. Sheds in shady areas reduced heat stress and increased milk yield.
Institutional Intervention
Institutional interventions included the establishment of seed banks, fodder banks, commodity groups, and custom hiring for timely operations. Community nursery raising, irrigation, collective marketing, and climate literacy through a village-level weather station were also implemented. Awareness camps were organized, and Jay Prakash VCRMC, constituted at KVK Nawada, Bihar, generated a maximum amount of Rs. 96,972 in the VCRMC bank account and received the National Award for the best performing VCRMC in 2012-13.
ICT in Agriculture
The use of information and communication tools in agriculture, although a relatively new venture, has been applied extensively by KVKs in Bihar and Jharkhand. Tools such as Kisan Mobile Advisory Services, Kisan Chaupal, and Farmers’ Portal are used by all KVKs in these states. Registered mobile numbers of more than 10,000 farmers are maintained to provide advisory services in events of delayed rainfall, scanty rainfall, drought, and flood. Contingent crop planning in adverse climatic situations is made available to farmers through ICT tools along with other communication measures.
Value Addition
Abundant production of vegetables, mushrooms, fruits, etc., in both states is effectively utilized for value addition to provide additional income and employment to farm women, as well as to prevent spoilage and avoid market glut. Self-help groups are primarily trained for value addition and marketing of their produce under the brand name of KVK/host organization. Large-scale value addition in districts such as Gumla, Godda, Dumka, Palamu, Ranchi, Hazaribag, Giridih, Muzaffarpur, Patna, Rohtas, Araria, Kisanganj, Banka, Bhagalpur, Saran, Munger, Purnea, Gaya, Nawada, and others by farm women under the guidance of concerned KVKs has helped them earn an average monthly income ranging from Rs. 5,000 to 15,000. Marketing arrangements with state organs like Jharcraft by the KVKs have ensured additional income on a regular basis.
Success Stories
1. Bee-Keeping
Shri Radhakant Giri is a highly successful farmer who, through hard work and determination, has achieved a good livelihood and helped other farmers become self-reliant. He hails from the small village of Bhat Boreya, Block-Burmu, Dist-Ranchi. Initially struggling with poor economic conditions, he left his studies after intermediate and started a business. Shri Giri decided to focus on honey production and faced challenges with initial low production due to Indian bees and lack of knowledge. He then enrolled in a 45-day motivational course at Ramakrishna Mission Ashrama, Divyayan Krishi Vigyan Kendra, Ranchi, in 1997. After completing special training in honey bee keeping, he started his business with two boxes of Italian bees. Despite facing many problems, the emotional support from his family helped him persevere. Today, Shri Giri effectively runs his business with 55 boxes of honey bees and supplies high-quality honey to reputed companies like Dabur and Kashmir Apiary. He also engages in the production of cereals, vegetables, fruits, and milk scientifically. Shri Giri completed a master training course from the Central Bee Research Training Centre, Pune, in February 2012. He has been honored by the former President of India, Her Excellency Dr. (Mrs.) Pratibha Patil, in November 2007.
2. Borax: Boon for Cauliflower Growers in East Singhbhum
In East Singhbhum district, cauliflower is grown as a mid and late-season crop. The soil in the district is 77% acidic, with a pH varying from 4.1 to 7.3. Cauliflower acts as an indicator plant for boron deficiency, which appears first in its vegetative parts like browning of curd and hollowness in the stem. Continuous and intensive cultivation of vegetables in the same field also contributes to boron deficiency, leading to rotting and browning of curd heads up to 70-80%. Since the establishment of KVK, East Singhbhum, scientists observed that farmers used to spray pesticides and other chemicals or growth hormones to address this problem, but these attempts failed. An OFT conducted in 10 farmers' fields during 2006-07 showed satisfactory results with the application of borax in spray at 15 kg/ha (yield 203.20 q/ha and 10% rotting) compared to soil application of borax at 10 kg/ha (yield 194.20 q/ha and 15% rotting) and control (yield 153.20 q/ha and 40% rotting). The efficiency of borax was further verified through Front Line Demonstrations in Patamda, Jamshedpur, Ghatsila, Dhalbhumgarh, and Potka blocks during 2008 and 2012. Results indicated increased production and productivity due to decreased browning and rotting of cauliflower heads. Field days (5 nos) were organized for wider dissemination, and farmers were convinced of the effectiveness of spraying borax at 15 kg/ha twice—first after 20-25 DAT and second 40-45 DAT. Through FLD, 115 farmers from different blocks of East Singhbhum district are now practicing borax application in their cauliflower fields with negligible browning and rotting. The curd color and firmness were also better. On average, a yield of 375 q/ha (var. Barkha) was observed in borax-sprayed fields compared to 195 q/ha in control fields. The net return was around Rs. 1,12,500 per ha, with a benefit-cost ratio of 2.50. Other farmers in nearby villages and blocks are also adopting this practice, and as borax is readily available in the local market, farmers face no difficulty in procurement.
3. Sri Ramdeep Singh
Sri Ramdeep Singh, son of Late Chattar Singh, from village Ranbigha, P.O. Uttrain, Block-Konch, district Gaya, is a progressive farmer with 5.0 acres of land. Initially managing his livelihood through traditional cultivation methods, he sought improved agricultural techniques from KVK scientists to enhance production and income. He was initially reluctant to adopt diversified agriculture but eventually established a guava orchard on 2.0 acres of land, earning approximately Rs. 1.8 lakh annually. He also intercrops turmeric, ginger, and elephant foot yam, and produces paddy and wheat on another 2.0 acres of land, earning Rs. 80,000 annually. Under diversified training, he also grows flowers (marigold, Rajanigandha, gladiolus), spirulina, organic vegetables, onions, potatoes, and sugarcane, generating additional income. He developed a 60-bed vermicompost unit, earning a net income of almost Rs. 2,00,000 annually by selling vermicompost, farmyard manure, and other organic fertilizers. Sri Singh also owns two dairy animals and runs a goat farming unit, producing organic milk for the local market. His total annual income now exceeds Rs. 4.0 lakh. His success story is a testimony to the benefits of diversified farming and innovative agricultural practices.
4. Developing and Promoting High-Yielding Varieties of Rice
Rice is a major crop in Purnea, where farmers traditionally grow low-yielding varieties like Chaturbhuj and Laxmi. However, the introduction of high-yielding varieties such as CR Dhan 205 and CR Dhan 306 by KVK has led to significant improvements in production. Farmers initially faced challenges with the low yield and high cost of seeds but gradually adopted these improved varieties through training and demonstrations. Results from various villages in the region showed average yields ranging from 6.0 to 7.0 t/ha for the new varieties, compared to 2.5 t/ha for the old varieties. The adoption of these high-yielding varieties has also led to increased incomes for farmers and improved their overall quality of life. The success of this initiative has prompted more farmers to switch to high-yielding varieties, thus contributing to regional food security and economic stability.


