Tata-Cornell Institute for Agriculture and Nutrition
Introduction
This report presents a food systems approach for achieving Sustainable Development Goal 2 (SDG2)—zero hunger by 2030—in Bihar, India. SDG2 explicitly focuses on both the importance of ending all forms of malnutrition and the role that agriculture can play in achieving that goal. These factors are crucial for Bihar, which has one of the highest rates of malnutrition in the country—especially among women and children—and is a largely rural population. Nearly half of children under the age of five in the state are stunted and underweight. It also ranks among the top five states in the country with the highest proportion of women and children with anemia. Most of the burden of malnutrition is concentrated in rural Bihar, where the population is heavily dependent on agriculture as a source of livelihood. Bihar’s Economic Survey 2019–20 recognizes that agriculture is the mainstay of the state’s economics, influencing food security and overall rural development. The sector accounts for one-fifth of the gross state value-added. Even though the share of agriculture in gross state domestic product (GSDP) has declined from 36 percent in 2000–01 to 20 percent in 2017–18, the sector continues to be an important source of employment for more than 70 percent of the population.
Food Systems Approach
The food systems approach for achieving zero hunger in Bihar is based on investments in agriculture, leading to better household-level nutrition via higher incomes, access to diverse foods, more equitable intrahousehold food allocation, and improved health environments. Agriculture in Bihar is characterized by small and marginal holdings that are exceedingly dependent on monsoons for irrigation. Together, these two characteristics have resulted in low productivity, inadequate price realization, and increasing postharvest losses. Improvements in agricultural productivity can help achieve gains in nutrition through improved access to diverse, nutritious foods, like pulses, fruits, vegetables, and livestock products, which are more nutrient-dense compared to staple grains like rice and wheat. At the same time, improved agricultural yields can also result in an increase in incomes for farmers. The increased income can result in an increased demand for, and access to, a more micronutrient-rich basket of foods that can be supplied by well-functioning local markets. However, household availability and access to food will not necessarily ensure adequate consumption. This report also considers the importance of women’s empowerment and the health environment for better health outcomes. At the individual level, women’s empowerment, particularly in agriculture, can ensure an equitable distribution of nutritious foods within the household, resulting in improved dietary diversity. Individual-level nutrition outcomes will also depend on the surrounding health and hygiene environment that influences the absorption of nutrients in the body. An overarching theme in this report is the need for convergence in the design and implementation of policies across sectors and stakeholders to achieve SDG2 in Bihar.
Key Findings
Bihar's Malnutrition Rates
Bihar has some of the highest rates of malnutrition in the country and has made the slowest progress toward SDG2. Despite impressive gains in per capita gross domestic product (GDP) in the last decade, poverty is widespread in Bihar, and more so in the northern districts, as compared to the south. This is reflected in poor diets and nutritional outcomes for women and children. Dietary intake is primarily based on staples like rice and wheat. Protein-rich meats and eggs are consumed by less than 30 percent of children (2–4 years old) and women. Vegetables, fruits, milk, and oils account for 6 percent of calorie intake in Bihar, while the share of calories from eggs, fish, and meat is less than 1 percent. Such a lack of intake of diversified foods is reflected in poor anthropometric outcomes for children. Bihar not only has the highest prevalence of child stunting (42 percent) in the country but also poor nutritional outcomes for women, as reflected in the high rates of anemia (53 percent) and low body mass index (BMI) (35 percent). It occupies the lowest rank on the SDG India Index for 2019 and is one of the five states with the lowest indicator score for SDG2.

1. Efforts to Double Farmer Incomes and Productivity
Need to prioritize yield stabilization and improved market linkages.
Bihar’s traditional rice–wheat cropping system is characterized by one of the lowest yields in the Indo-Gangetic Plain (IGP). A doubling of farmer incomes in Bihar would increase the supply of and access to nutritious foods for small and marginal households in the state.
The stability of yields in Bihar can be ensured by investing in irrigation infrastructure, including flood and watershed management in the northern districts and the curbing of overexploitation of groundwater in the southern districts. Investments in irrigation can also help increase cropping intensity, especially in the south, by way of traditional systems like the Ahar-Pyne. Ensuring farmers have access to improved seed varieties, like shorter duration, hybrid rice and longer maturing, disease-resistant cultivars for wheat will also boost productivity. This will require investments in agricultural research and a strengthening of the seed supply chains. Policy efforts should also focus on sustained adoption of improved crop management practices, such as following an optimum date for transplantation of rice or early sowing of wheat. The adoption of technologies needs to be supported by Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) extension services and ensuring that complementary inputs are also accessible.
In order for income gains to be realized from yield improvements, there is a need to invest in accessible, well-functioning markets. For farmers to realize income gains, this will require strengthening farmer producer organizations (FPOs) and other aggregation models to link farmers to markets, bringing in private sector buyers following the repeal of the Agricultural Produce Market Committee (APMC) Act in Bihar, and further streamlining of government procurement activities.

2. Agricultural Policy Needs to be Nutrition-Sensitive
In order to incentivize the diversification of the cropping system toward more nutritious nonstaple foods.
Bihar’s agricultural policies need to focus on the explicit goal of nutrition security, that is, ensuring that households can access and afford diverse, nutritious foods throughout the year. A diversification of the cropping system in Bihar stands to benefit smallholder farmers by ensuring the supply of nonstaples essential for nutritional security. The predominantly rice–wheat cropping system can be diversified by introducing intercropping of pulses using high-yielding, short duration seeds in a rice–lentil system in the rice fallow regions in high residual moisture zones. Similarly, the cultivation of hybrid varieties on raised beds in flood-prone districts in Bihar can further diversify the production of maize, which has one of the highest productivity levels in Bihar. Additionally, the growth in fruits and vegetables needs to be sustained, and even improved, with supporting investments in postharvest, cold-storage infrastructure to limit losses of these perishable products. For livestock, efforts should focus on improved breeds in order to realize higher yields of animal-sourced foods, like milk and meats. Promoting Makhana (fox nut) and fishery-based farming systems in north Bihar would also diversify cropping systems, as well as make fish available for consumption.
The move toward a diversified production system must not exclude women. They can influence the modifications of the mix of crops cultivated both for consumption by their households, as well as for sale in the market. Focusing on women farmers is also a key component of SDG2.3. A diversification of the production system can also potentially increase smallholder incomes if supported by adequate market linkages and infrastructure investments.

3. Bihar’s Food Safety Nets Should Be Leveraged
As channels for ensuring that nutrient-rich nonstaples are available to households for increased consumption.
Improvements in yields and a diversified basket of agricultural produce can contribute to an increase in the supply of diverse, micronutrient-rich foods in Bihar’s food safety net programs, namely the Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS), Mid-Day Meal (MDM), and the Public Distribution System (PDS). This will require a convergence between the objectives and activities of the Departments of Women and Child Development; Education; Health; and Food and Consumer Protection. For example, small fish, green leafy vegetables, and biofortified crops, such as high-zinc rice and wheat, high-iron pulses, and orange-fleshed sweet potatoes (OFSP) could be grown by the Jeevika groups and procured for Anganwadi child care centers, schools, and the PDS. Milk fortified with vitamins A and D could be supplied in collaboration with Sudha Dairy. Take Home Rations (THR), prepared and supplied by Jeevika groups to the Anganwadi, could be scaled up under appropriate food safety regulations for use in locally processed food. This would provide a boost to the local economy and ensure livelihoods for women. Animal-sourced foods, like eggs and milk, and diversified crops, like pulses and Nutri Millets, can be procured by the Food and Consumer Protection Department for consumption in Anganwadi centers and schools. The PDS can also be made more nutrition-sensitive by working toward decentralized procurement and supply of millets, pulses, and other biofortified crops by the Department of Food and Consumer Protection and the Food Corporation of India.

4. Women’s Empowerment is a Pathway for Increasing
Demand for micronutrient-rich foods for household consumption.
Women’s empowerment is a strong channel for ensuring that there is an increased demand for micronutrient-rich foods for household consumption. Ensuring women’s access to productive resources in agriculture (like land, irrigation, and credit) and enabling them to have greater input in decisions related to production, use of income, and time use are some areas where interventions can be targeted to empower women in agriculture. Women can be part of the move toward diversified production systems, such as the farming of nutrition-rich crops like pulses and millets, maintenance of kitchen gardens, and management of livestock/poultry/fisheries through the Jeevika groups already present in Bihar. The Departments of Agriculture and of Animal Husbandry and Fisheries can provide technical support to the Jeevika groups in their efforts toward diversification of farming systems. Rural development departments can use the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 2005 (Ministry of Rural Development) program to help landless people and women get work on projects that could transform the soil and water conservation situation across the state, especially in the drier regions of south Bihar. Women need to be linked to markets by way of information (on prices, for example), infrastructure (roads, transport), and institutional arrangements like self-help groups or FPOs, which result in better price realization because of collective bargaining power. These avenues can result in both an increased supply of micronutrient-rich foods and increased incomes for women. The latter, in turn, can increase demand for such foods.
Women can also play an important role in influencing intra-household food allocation. Positive nutrition behavior campaigns that address allocation can be implemented by bringing together government departments, development sector organizations, and public and private sector companies that have a presence in Bihar. More than 900,000 women’s self-help groups have been formed across Bihar. These social capital-rich women’s institutions offer an opportunity to layer together programs related to women’s empowerment and positive nutrition behavior.

5. The Role of Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene for
Nutrition security should be recognized throughout the food system, beginning with crop production and postharvest activities, to eventual nutrient absorption in the household environment.
The existing drinking water and sanitation programs of the national and state government need to emphasize the importance of water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) for nutrition security. In addition to investments in infrastructure, like latrines and piped drinking water supplied in homes, there is a need to spread awareness of the importance of good hygiene practices, such as handwashing. The health and family welfare departments can collaborate with the JEEViKA groups in this effort. Similarly, the Department of Education can bring awareness campaigns to schools. Finally, there needs to be investment in food safety, such as using airtight bags for storing food and taking steps to address occupational risks, like disseminating information about waterborne diseases.

6. Getting to Zero Hunger in Bihar Will Require
A convergence in the policy objectives and implementation of related actions across departments and ministries, not just at national and state levels but crucially also at district and village levels.
Bihar can realize the goals of SDG2 more effectively if there is convergence between the objectives and activities of various government department policies. This begins with an explicit incorporation of nutrition security as the primary goal—not just related to reducing malnutrition (as in the POSHAN Abhiyaan, the national nutrition mission), but also related to other interlinked components of the food system like doubling productivity, empowering women, and promoting healthy environments. Such a convergence of objectives must be backed up by a convergence in implementation on the ground, meaning that these goals are jointly addressed through interlinked, coordinated activities across the departments.

 Introduction
A woman walks across some farmland in Khopawer, Bihar. Related to SDG 2, there is spatial variation in the distribution of malnutrition within India. Eastern states like Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, and Odisha are characterized by low agricultural productivity, a high share of agriculture in the gross domestic product (GDP), and low levels of urbanization. Together, these factors result in low incomes and less access to diverse foods, as reflected in the high rates of undernutrition.
The NITI Aayog has developed the SDG India Index, which assesses the performance of each state relative to each of the SDGs. It assigns a score, ranging from 0 to 100, to each state, with the score of 100 reflecting achievement of the goal in question. The score is generated for each SDG, in addition to a composite score based on the 17 SDGs and 100 underlying indicators. The SDG score for India was 60 in 2019, up from 57 in 2018. However, at 35, the subgoal score for SDG 2 is the lowest across all SDGs. The spatial differences in the prevalence of malnutrition in India are also reflected in the state-level results. With an overall score of 50 on the SDG Index in 2019, Bihar has the lowest rank among all states. It has the highest proportion of children under 5 who are stunted. Furthermore, nearly 60 percent of pregnant women have anemia, and approximately 40 percent of children below 4 years of age are underweight. These statistics are reflected in Bihar’s performance for SDG 2, in which it scored a dismal 26, placing it ahead of only Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, and Daman and Diu. The implications for the achievement of the subgoals of SDG 2 are significant.
Pathways and National Policies
Pathways 1 and 2 are priorities in India’s national policies and are embodied in SDG 2.3, which calls for the doubling of agricultural productivity and incomes of smallholder farmers, and in SDG 2.4, which calls for resilient agricultural practices to increase productivity and production.
Although the SDGs are national-level targets, there is a need for regional perspectives in analyzing progress. In this report, we discuss each of the four nutrition pathways, specifically for Bihar. In doing so, we focus on the context-specific nature of agricultural production and challenges for increasing incomes in the state, as well as the subnational status of factors like women’s empowerment that together determine the eventual nutritional status for individuals.
The NITI Aayog, the nodal agency for monitoring India’s progress on SDGs, recognizes that “sub-national governments hold the key to India’s quest for sustainable development.” In other words, India’s progress on the SDGs will be a function of how well it is able to progress toward realizing them in the states and Union territories. This is largely due to two reasons: first, a significant chunk of the planning, budgeting, and implementation of social, economic, and development policies related to the SDGs happens at the sub-national level; second, there are regional differences in the level of agricultural growth and structural transformation between states that can help explain why states are lagging behind the SDGs to different degrees and also indicate an optimal, context-specific policy mix to address the gap in meeting Bihar's SDG Vision report recognizes that the poor state of nutrition persists, despite impressive gains in economic growth in the state.
Suggested Policy Changes
In this report, we suggest that Bihar’s agricultural policies need to move away from staple cereals, like rice and wheat, to encourage diversified production systems through the promotion of pulses, coarse cereals, fruits, vegetables, and animal husbandry. Such a shift in policy will both ensure a supply of diverse micronutrient-rich foods in the state and generate demand for the same. Increased demand can also stem from increases in the incomes of smallholder farmers as yields of rice and wheat are improved. Some strategies for this include strengthening the input supply chain and ensuring access to technologies and information by way of extension services. Well-functioning market arrangements, along with procurement policies, are also important for price realization. Women farmers cannot be excluded from such policy changes, and therefore, their access to productive inputs and control over income should be ensured. Behavior change campaigns should address stakeholders at all points of the food system:
Farmers — about the importance of cultivating diversified crops for nutrition;
Women — about the importance of cultivating, purchasing, preparing, and distributing nutritious foods within the household;
Communities — about the importance of clean water and hygiene for eventual nutrient absorption.
Targets
2.1 | By 2030, end hunger and ensure access by all people, in particular the poor and people in vulnerable situations, including infants, to safe, nutritious, and sufficient food all year round.
2.2 | By 2030, end all forms of malnutrition, including achieving, by 2025, the internationally agreed targets on stunting and wasting in children under 5 years of age, and address the nutritional needs of adolescent girls, pregnant and lactating women, and older persons.
2.3 | By 2030, double the agricultural productivity and incomes of small-scale food producers, in particular women, indigenous peoples, family farmers, pastoralists, and fishers, including through secure and equal access to land, other productive resources and inputs, knowledge, financial services, markets, and opportunities for value addition and non-farm employment.
2.4 | By 2030, ensure sustainable food production systems and implement resilient agricultural practices that increase productivity and production, help maintain ecosystems, strengthen capacity for adaptation to climate change, extreme weather, drought, flooding, and other disasters, and progressively improve land and soil quality.
2.5 | By 2020, maintain the genetic diversity of seeds, cultivated plants, and farmed and domesticated animals and their related wild species, including through soundly managed and diversified seed and plant banks at the national, regional, and international levels, and promote access to and fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the utilization of genetic resources and associated traditional knowledge, as internationally agreed.
2A | Increase investment, including through enhanced international cooperation, in rural infrastructure, agricultural research and extension services, technology development, and plant and livestock gene banks in order to enhance agricultural productive capacity in developing countries, particularly least developed countries.
2B | Correct and prevent trade restrictions and distortions in world agricultural markets, including through the parallel elimination of all forms of agricultural export subsidies and all export measures with equivalent effect, in accordance with the mandate of the Doha Development Round.
2C | Adopt measures to ensure the proper functioning of food commodity markets and their derivatives and facilitate timely access to market information, including on food reserves, in order to help limit extreme food price volatility.
End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition, and promote sustainable agriculture.
Box 2.1 | DISTRIBUTION OF HOUSEHOLDS BY WEALTH INDEX IN BIHAR
The National Family Health Survey (NFHS) classifies households in every district into five distinct wealth quintiles: poorest, poorer, middle, richer, and richest. Such a classification of wealth categories allows us to view the distribution of wealth within each district and make comparisons within the state. NFHS uses two different indices. The first is an all-India wealth index based on average wealth levels across the entire country. The second is a state-specific wealth index. In Bihar’s case, it generates the quintiles based on the wealth distribution within the state. These two indices result in two very different pictures of poverty in Bihar.
If we consider the two lowest quintiles, then the share of households falling in the poorest and poorer quintiles can be used as a proxy for poverty estimates. If the national-level wealth index is used, then 48 percent of households fall into the poorest quintile in the state and an additional 23 percent into the poorer quintile. Together, this suggests that around 70 percent of households can be classified as poor in the state, compared to around 40 percent in the country overall, on average. On the other hand, if the state-specific rural wealth index for Bihar is used, then the proportions of poor households in Bihar and India are similar at about 40 percent. Not only does the overall prevalence of poverty differ based on the index used, but the indices also result in very different rankings of districts.

Relationship Between Income and Nutritional Status
There is a clear relationship between income and nutritional status across districts of Bihar. Rates of child malnutrition, as reflected in stunting, wasting, and underweight, are significantly higher in the poorest wealth quintiles and decrease as household incomes increase (Figure 2.3). One of the factors that has been identified as an immediate cause of poor nutritional outcomes is the intake of a diet that lacks enough calories and micronutrients. A diet that lacks key micronutrients makes individuals vulnerable to conditions like anemia and manifests in children as stunting and wasting. Conversely, a diet that is based on an excessive intake of calories and inadequate micronutrients can lead to overnutrition, as reflected in obesity.
In line with the evolution of global thinking around food security, target SDG2.1 calls specifically to “ensure access by all people, in particular the poor and people in vulnerable situations, including infants, to safe, nutritious and sufficient food all year round.” Bihar, as well as the rest of India, is faced with the triple burden of malnutrition—undernutrition, overnutrition, and micronutrient deficiencies. SDG2 calls to end all these forms of malnutrition.

2.1 Child Malnutrition
Child malnutrition is one of the most important development challenges in India. This is particularly true for Bihar, which has one of the highest rates of child malnutrition in the country. Malnourished children face a greater risk of mortality during their childhood. A poor nutritional status during childhood also affects outcomes and abilities later in life. Children who are poorly nourished may be faced with lower cognitive skills, poor educational outcomes, and reduced incomes as adults. For girls, in particular, poor childhood nutrition can have negative implications for the course of their future pregnancies and the health of their babies, resulting in a cycle of malnutrition that is transmitted across generations.
As of the latest estimation of 2018–19, a little more than 40 percent of children under the age of 5 were stunted (low height-for-age) and underweight (low weight-for-age), and slightly more than one-fifth were wasted (low weight-for-height). These rates of malnutrition are higher than those for the country (Figure 2.4). Although the prevalence of stunting, wasting, and underweight did decline from 2005–15, the gains have been slow, and there was a recent increase in stunting and wasting between 2016 and 2019.
Figure 2.5 | Prevalence of child malnutrition in Bihar, by district (2019-20)
Data source: NFHS-5 (2019–20)
a) Stunting
b) Underweight
c) Wasting
Figure 2.6 | Prevalence of anemia in children (6-59 months) in Bihar, by district
Data source: NFHS-5 (2019–20)
There is considerable variation in the distribution of malnutrition among children across the state. The high overall rates for stunting are reflected by the fact that, in most districts, the rates are at least 47 percent. The prevalence of underweight and wasting in children is greater in the southern districts, as compared to the north. The spatial distribution shows that some districts are burdened with high rates of multiple types of child malnutrition. For instance, in the southern districts, like Gaya, Arwal, Patna, Banka, and Jamui, the prevalence of all three—stunting, underweight, and wasting—are very high.
Children in Bihar also suffer from high rates of micronutrient deficiencies, known as hidden hunger. In every district of the state, at least 50 percent of the children below the age of 5 are anemic (Figure 2.6), and most of the districts have shown an increased number of anemic children in the past three years. In the state overall, a little less than 70 percent of children are anemic. Interestingly, the increased rates of anemia are seen even when there is an improvement in the number of pregnant women consuming iron and folic acid supplements, which jumped from 10 to 18 percent between 2015–16 and 2019–20. In addition to anemia, approximately 20 percent of children in the state are deficient in vitamin A, vitamin D, and zinc. Other prominent deficiencies prevalent among children are vitamin B12 (13.8 percent) and folate in blood (6.1 percent).

2.2 Nutritional Status of Women
Women’s nutritional status is the pillar around which the nutritional status of the household is built. There is strong evidence pointing to the important role of maternal health in ensuring better nutritional outcomes for children. At the same time, women’s health status determines their ability to take care of their children, work and earn income, and allocate time to domestic tasks like food preparation and consumption. In Bihar, a little over a third of women have a low body mass index (BMI). There is spatial variation, however. In districts like Araria and Purnea, 40 percent of women have low BMI, while in districts like Bhojpur and Saran, the prevalence is 25 percent (Figure 2.9).
Anemia is a public health concern in India. The condition can result in maternal mortality, weakness, diminished physical and mental capacity, increased morbidity from infectious diseases, perinatal mortality, premature delivery, and low birthweight. Though the share of anemic women in Bihar had declined from 68 to 60 percent between 2006 and 2016, the latest 2020 NFHS data indicate an increase in the past three years. The data also show that the initial decline was not sustainable, and the prevalence of anemia continues to be high, with rates for women nearly double that for men (Figure 2.10). In every district of the state, more than 50 percent of women are anemic (Figure 2.11). In districts like Araria, Supaul, and Purnea, the prevalence of anemia in women is almost 70 percent.
2.2 Nutritional Status and Dietary Diversity in Bihar
Poor Nutritional Status: Poor nutritional status, as measured by BMI, and micronutrient deficiencies like iron deficiency (which leads to anemia) are just one part of the malnutrition faced by women. Poor health can also result from an excessive intake of calories relative to essential micronutrients, as reflected in overweight and obesity. Obesity is a known risk factor for noncommunicable diseases (NCDs), such as diabetes, heart disease, and cancer. These diseases can increase the likelihood of health issues for future generations.
In Bihar, the share of men and women who are overweight or obese has tripled since 2005. Approximately 16 percent of men and women in Bihar were obese in 2020, compared to approximately 20 percent in India overall (Figure 2.12). Districts with a low proportion of underweight women have higher rates of overweight and obesity.
Dietary Diversity: While cereals like rice and wheat form the staple diet for most households, nutritional outcomes will depend on the consumption of non-staple food groups, such as dairy, pulses, leafy vegetables, fruits, eggs, meat, and fish.
Figure 2.14 | Women’s Dietary Diversity in Bihar (2015): Dietary diversity refers to the number of food groups consumed by the woman in the previous 24 hours (panel a) and 7 days (panel b) respectively. The food groups considered are non-staples: dairy, pulses, green leafy vegetables, eggs, meat, fish, and fruits.
Data Source: NFHS-4 (2015-16)
Diet Diversity:
Panel a: Daily Diet Diversity
Panel b: Weekly Diet Diversity
Consumption Patterns: In this regard, data from the NFHS indicate that, on average, there is not a single district in the state where women reported having consumed more than 3 such non-staple food groups in the previous 24 hours. In most districts, this remains the case even for a weekly diet (Figure 2.14). Although at least 80 percent of women reported consuming legumes and green leafy vegetables, either daily or weekly, the share of women who consumed dairy products, fruits, eggs, meat, or fish is much lower.
2.3 Transitioning Diets
Conventional Food Security Definitions: Conventional definitions of food security have focused on ensuring adequate food for populations so that caloric needs are met. Although outdated, National Sample Survey (NSS) data indicated that cereals accounted for 66 percent of calorie intake in India and 70 percent in Bihar. Vegetables and fruits, milk, and oils accounted for another 6 percent of calorie intake in Bihar, while the share of calories from eggs, fish, and meat was less than 1 percent (Figure 2.17).
Per Capita Intake: Per person per day intakes of energy and protein in Bihar exceed that of the average for the country. However, per capita energy intake has declined from 2,096 kcal to 2,010 kcal from 2004–05 to 2011–12 and is lower than the recommended 2,155 kcal per person per day. Per person per day intake of proteins has remained unchanged at 58.1 g over the same time and exceeds dietary recommendations by 10 g. The intake of fat was 29.7 g per person per day, just above the recommended value of 28 g.
Focus on Nutritional Security: In order to meet SDG2, the focus needs to shift from food security to nutritional security. The latter refers to ensuring that individual diets not only meet basic calorie requirements but also provide individuals with the required micronutrients. This requires that dietary intake be comprised not just of calorie-dense staple cereals like rice and wheat, but also non-staple food groups like dairy, pulses, meats, eggs, fruits, and vegetables, that together are rich in proteins, vitamins, and minerals. Such a focus on nutritious foods is important for Bihar, where diets have been primarily cereal-centric and access to and consumption of non-staples have been lagging.
Cost as a Constraint: A major constraint to households accessing diverse, nutritious foods is cost. A proxy indicator for food prices examines how much households are spending on different food groups. In Bihar, nearly 60 percent of total household expenditures was on food in 2019. This amounts to Rs. 4453.80 per household per month, on average.

Composition of Monthly Food Expenditure in Bihar, by District (2019)
Cereals, vegetables, and dairy products each account for nearly one-fifth of monthly food expenditures. Fruits account for just 3 percent, while protein-rich foods, like meat, fish, and eggs, make up 15 percent of the total expenditure on food in any given month.
Although the food expenditures described here reflect redistribution toward nutrient-rich non-staples, they are still far below what is required for healthy diets. Food-based dietary guidelines offer a recommended intake of the various food groups required for a healthy diet. Recent estimates suggest.
Data source: TARINA Baseline and Midline Survey
Some of the underlying factors that have resulted in such high rates of malnutrition in Bihar and the rest of eastern India are low levels of agricultural productivity, low per capita GDP with a high share of agriculture in GDP, and urbanization.
The rest of this report presents a food systems framework that comprehensively addresses these factors, together with those that determine individual-level nutrient status.
Average Price per kg of Food Group (USD, 2019 PPP)
Data source: TARINA, Baseline (2016–17) and Midline (2018–19) Surveys
Box 2.4 | Cost of Diets in Munger from TARINA’s Market Diversity Study
The TARINA market diversity study collected high-frequency data on the availability and prices of nearly 250 food items in rural markets (haats) in Munger from June 2018 to May 2019. Using the prices from the study, we estimated how much an individual will have to spend each day to meet the global dietary recommendations put forward by the EAT–Lancet Commission in 2019.
Households in Munger were spending an average of US$1.20 per person per day on food purchased from the market. This suggests that, on average, per capita spending on food will have to increase fourfold. The bulk of this increase comes from non-staples, like leafy vegetables, meats, and dairy products.
Our results indicate that the EAT–Lancet diet will cost nearly US$5.00 per person per day if individuals purchase the average cost food items in each food group. The biggest deficit in spending on actual diets, relative to the EAT–Lancet recommendations, is centered around food groups such as meats and dairy, which correspond to the relatively higher market prices for these food groups.
“To ensure that a nutritious diet is affordable, food systems will need to be reoriented in ways that make such foods accessible and affordable to all.”
Agriculture–Nutrition Pathways for Achieving the SDG2 Goal in Bihar
In this section, we highlight the four main pathways by which agriculture can influence nutritional outcomes for individuals and households: increased incomes, year-round access to diverse foods, equitable intrahousehold food allocation, and nutrient absorption. The first two pathways determine household food access while the latter two are instrumental in determining individual-level nutrition outcomes.
For smallholder farmers in India, incomes are a function of productivity, market linkages, and nonfarm opportunities. Household access to diverse foods largely depends on proximity to markets, on-farm diversification, and safety-net programs. Intrahousehold allocation depends on women’s empowerment, while nutrient absorption is determined by factors like clean water and sanitation. Readers are referred to Pingali and Sunder (2017) for a detailed discussion of this framework.
Pathway 1: Agriculture as a Source of Household Income
Nearly two-thirds of India’s population is rural, and one-third of the rural population depends on agriculture as a source of livelihood. In this context, an increase in agricultural productivity can increase incomes, resulting in improved nutritional outcomes. Higher incomes allow rural households to purchase diverse foods, invest in health care and sanitation, and protect against shocks, like those resulting from poor harvests. Rao and Pingali found that, for rural households in India, a 10-percentage point increase in agricultural income was associated with a 0.10 percentage point growth in women’s BMI over a period of four years.
Pathway 2: Household Access to Diverse Foods
Households can access a nutritionally diverse basket of foods through three main sources: own-production, markets, and safety-net programs. A diversification of production at the farm level can allow households to access and consume a diverse set of foods throughout the year. Such a relationship, however, is more likely in instances where market integration is less developed, as in many parts of sub-Saharan Africa. Production and consumption decisions decouple as market integration increases, allowing households to purchase foods from local markets, subject to household incomes and market prices.
According to Bennet’s Law, as household incomes increase, households spend a greater share of income on non-staples, resulting in demand for a diversified diet. An increase in the supply of diverse foods in local markets can ensure that diverse foods are available and at affordable prices to the rural poor. In addition to own-production and markets, households also rely on various kinds of safety nets to access food. One example is India’s Public Distribution System (PDS), which provides subsidized staple grains.
Pathway 3: Intrahousehold Food Allocation
Which foods are consumed by different members of the household, and in what quantity and frequency, can determine eventual nutritional outcomes. Women often tend to eat last and eat the least. This, in turn, results in poor health outcomes for both women and children. Research indicates that, in India, women’s empowerment in agriculture has a significant association with their dietary intake and micronutrient status, such as iron deficiency. Ensuring women’s input in production decisions, access to resources like credit, and encouraging their participation in self-help groups are avenues for improving empowerment levels. Women’s time use between agriculture and non-agricultural activities is also an important factor that determines nutritional outcomes.
Pathway 4: Health Environment
The health environment refers to the status of sanitation and hygiene in the environment. It helps to determine the absorption of nutrients in the body, and thus, influences final individual-level nutritional outcomes. Behavior change strategies aimed at reducing the prevalence of open defecation and promoting practices like washing hands with soap before eating and sanitizing drinking water can improve the health environment. Furthermore, sustainable agricultural management practices, such as adequate postharvest storage facilities that limit the growth of fungal toxins, can also ensure an environment that is geared toward improved health outcomes.
A Food Systems Approach for Improved Nutritional Outcomes
A food systems approach is useful for understanding and addressing the interlinkages between various SDGs and their sub-goals. Pathways 1 and 2 directly align with SDG2.3 (double agricultural productivity and incomes of smallholder farmers) and SDG2.4 (resilient agricultural practices that increase productivity and production). Pathways 3 and 4 align more closely with other goals of the SDGs and eventual nutritional outcomes of SDG2. The goals of SDG6, involving water and sanitation, as well as the targets for maternal and child health within SDG3, are strongly linked to Pathway 4. Similarly, Pathway 3 is linked to the goals of SDG5 for achieving gender equality and women’s empowerment. While Pathways 1 and 2 are sufficient from a food-security perspective, it is in conjunction with Pathways 3 and 4 that agriculture can effectively influence nutritional security.

Agriculture in Bihar: Cereal-Centric, Smallholder Cropping System
Bihar’s Economic Survey 2019–20 notes, “Agriculture is the mainstay of economies such as Bihar, underpinning their food security, rural employment, and rural development.” The sector accounts for one-fifth of the gross state value-added. Even though the share of agriculture in gross state domestic product (GSDP) has declined from 36 percent in 2000–01 to 20 percent in 2017–18, the sector continues to be an important source of employment for more than 70 percent of the population.
Crop Cultivation in Bihar
Crop cultivation in Bihar is predominantly carried out by “small” or “marginal” farmers, defined by the Indian government as those who own 1–2 ha or less than 1 ha of land, respectively. In Bihar, 97 percent of operational holdings are small or marginal. The number of marginal landholdings, and the area under them, have consistently increased since the 1970s, mirroring the national-level trend. The average area of small and marginal landholdings in Bihar—0.25 ha and 1.25 ha, respectively—is lower than the all-India averages of 0.38 ha and 1.40 ha. Taken together, these two categories of landholding account for 75 percent of the area under operational landholdings in the state. The share of gross cropped area in landholdings <1 ha is at least 50 percent in every district.
Income and Land Size Relationship
There is a clear relationship between land size and incomes. Across India, districts with a greater proportion of cropped area under marginal landholdings are in the states where the per capita agricultural incomes are the lowest. The average monthly income of agricultural households in Bihar was INR 3,558 in 2012–13. It was around INR 3,000 for households with small or marginal landholdings (<1 ha), while households that own 2 ha or more of land have incomes nearly three times that amount.
.Smallholder Farming in Bihar: Challenges and Opportunities
With smallholder farming as the dominant form of production in Bihar, household income is determined by smallholder productivity, market linkages, and nonfarm opportunities. Small farms face numerous challenges in production, especially in terms of access to essential factors of production, such as credit, inputs, information, and production technologies, in addition to poor access to output markets. Addressing these challenges is crucial for agricultural development and for successfully achieving SDG2.
Rice–Wheat Cropping System in Bihar
Bihar’s predominantly smallholder farming is centered around two key staple cereals: rice and wheat. Such a rice–wheat cropping system is characteristic of the nearly 13.5 million hectares of land in the Indo-Gangetic Plain (IGP) that stretches from Pakistan in the west to Nepal and Bangladesh in the east.
The term “cropping system” is used to characterize the crops grown in a given region, both spatially and temporally. Located in the Eastern IGP (EIGP), crop cultivation in Bihar is dominated by sequential rice–wheat cultivation.
Cereal Production in Bihar
Cereals account for nearly 90 percent of the gross cropped area in Bihar. Of that, more than 70 percent is rice and wheat. The staples also account for nearly 70 percent of the total food grain production in the state. Such a rice–wheat cropping system is the result of underlying agroclimatic and topographical factors in Bihar.
North Bihar: The Ganges demarcates the state into two halves: North Bihar, which is more densely populated, predominantly agrarian, and flood-prone.
South Bihar: South Bihar reflects a mix of agricultural and industrial activities and is largely drought-prone.
North Bihar consists of two agroclimatic zones:
Northwest Alluvial Plain (Zone I)
Northeast Alluvial Plain (Zone II)
Both of these zones receive more rainfall relative to the agroclimatic zone of the South Bihar alluvial plain. The differences in rainfall, temperature, and soil underlying these different agroclimatic zones are important determinants of land use patterns within the state and associated cropping systems that, in turn, influence food and nutrition security, as well as environmental sustainability. (Details are in the Appendix.)

Agricultural Output by Agroclimatic Zones
Rice Production:
Nearly half of the state’s total rice output is cultivated in the southwest agroclimatic zone in Bihar.
Another 25 percent of output originates in the northwest zone.
The northeast and southeast zones account for one-fifth of rice production.
The northeast zone accounts for the smallest share of rice output, at 12 percent.
Wheat Production:
Each agroclimatic zone’s share of wheat production is nearly identical to its share of area under wheat cultivation.
Production is centered primarily in the northwest zone.
Maize Production:
Cultivation of maize is concentrated in the northeast agroclimatic zone.
It accounts for nearly two-thirds of the total maize output, spread over nearly half of the area used for maize cultivation in Bihar.
There are variations in output and productivity across different types of crops. The increase in cereal production has largely stemmed from an increase in output and productivity of wheat and maize (for maize, these increases are predominantly in the rabi season), while output and productivity of rice has decreased in each of the three cultivating seasons. It will be interesting to examine further if the reduction of rice is being replaced by the increased production of wheat.
Pulses Production:
Pulses have not seen significant yield improvements over the period 2014–19.
Implications for Nutrition Security and Environmental Sustainability
The cereal-centric, smallholder farmer-driven agriculture in Bihar has implications for both nutrition security (SDG2) and environmental sustainability (SDG12, SDG13). Agroclimatic variations within Bihar will eventually determine the growth of incomes and yields in the agricultural sector. The potential for increasing farmer incomes by improvements in yields and diversification of the cropping system is presented in the next chapter.

Doubling Incomes While Reducing Risks
Doubling the incomes of smallholder farming households is a key area of focus, both for SDG2 and for the Indian government. SDG2.3 calls for doubling the incomes of small-scale farmers by 2030, placing particular importance on smallholders. In the case of crop agriculture, income growth could come from increasing yields, intensification of cultivation—growing two or three crops per year on the same piece of land—or increasing the efficiency of input use, thereby raising total factor productivity. Presumably, all these strategies would lead to an increase in farm incomes. Income growth-oriented strategies should also include production system diversification for crops and livestock, improved market access, and enhancement of rural nonfarm employment opportunities.
In this chapter, we focus on incomes from crop production and animal farming. For agricultural households in Bihar, as throughout India, these two areas account for nearly 60 percent of the average monthly income of agricultural households. Data from 2012–13 suggest that agricultural income in Bihar is almost half of the national average. The average monthly income from agricultural activities was INR 1,994 for Bihar in the year 2012–13, whereas it was INR 3,844, on average, throughout India.

Crop Cultivation and Income
Crop cultivation is the main source of income for small and marginal agricultural households in Bihar, accounting for nearly half of the average monthly income of agricultural households (2012–13). Conversely, small farmers reported negative returns from animal rearing, demonstrating a need for more support for the activity (Figure 5.1).
5.1 Increasing Productivity of Staple Cereals
An improvement in crop yields can act as a catalyst for improving nutritional outcomes through the income pathway, wherein higher yields can allow farmers to earn higher incomes from the production of a greater marketable surplus. In this respect, Bihar’s Third Agricultural Roadmap (2017–22) aims to create an environment geared toward profitability and sustainability of farming, while ensuring food and nutritional security.
Impact of the Green Revolution
The Green Revolution (GR) significantly increased the productivity of the rice–wheat cropping system. Much of these gains, however, were concentrated in the Western Indo-Gangetic Plain (WIGP), in states like Punjab and Haryana. In contrast, gains from the GR were low in the Eastern Indo-Gangetic Plain (EIGP), a region that is characterized by high population density, smallholder farming, poor market infrastructure, low access to new technologies, and climatic variations.
While there has been a steady increase in rice yields in the state, they are lower than yields found in the rest of the country, particularly in the WIGP. Wheat is the main rabi crop in Bihar, and productivity levels have increased in the last five years. However, the levels remain below average for India and the WIGP.
Yield Disparities and Contributing Factors
Viewed from the district level, the differences in cereal yields between the Western and Eastern IGP appear more nuanced. Data from the International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT) indicate that rice yields are highest in Punjab and Haryana at 3.8 tons/ha and 2.7 tons/ha, respectively. In comparison, rice and wheat yields in Bihar fall below 2.7 tons/ha and 2.4 tons/ha, respectively, in most districts.
Yields are a function of several factors, including climate, investment in rural infrastructure, and the availability of various inputs of production. A recent analysis of Bihar’s agricultural sector examines the contribution of different sources—area, prices, diversification, and yields—to crop output growth for Bihar for the period 2001–2017.
Addressing Constraints for Yield Improvement
The researchers found that the role of yields was an important determinant of growth in output, especially for staples like rice and wheat. However, for improvements in yields to translate into increased incomes, the report identifies two binding constraints that need to be addressed:
Ensuring Stability in Crop Yields: Factors like weather, technologies, and the occurrence of pests and diseases play a crucial role in yield stability.
Ensuring Adequate Price Realization and Market Linkages: Effective market linkages are essential to maximize income from increased yields.
Next, we discuss each of these constraints, first at the state level, and then at the district level, for rice and wheat.
Importance of Irrigation for Yield Stability
A sustained increase in crop yields in Bihar will depend on inputs of production, like irrigation, mechanization, and the use of fertilizers. The availability of, and access to, adequate and timely irrigation is an important issue. Farmers need to have access to the right amount of irrigation at the right time for yield improvements to be realized. At 70 percent, the irrigated area cultivated for food grains is lower in Bihar than the nearly 100 percent coverage in Punjab and Haryana. The share of gross cropped area in the state that is irrigated has increased from 67.45 percent in 2011–12 to 72 percent as of 2017–18.
Tube wells are the largest source of irrigation in each agroclimatic zone in Bihar and covered 63 percent of the total gross irrigated area in the entire state as of 2018. The high share of tube wells is associated with overexploitation of groundwater resources and an associated decline in the water table. A lack of adequate power is a major constraint in expanding the area under groundwater irrigation.
Climate and Its Impact on Crop Yield 
The importance of irrigation for yield stability is, in large part, because of the rainfed nature of crop cultivation in Bihar. Climate plays a big role in determining crop yields in the state. Even though the state is endowed with fertile soils and abundant water, extreme weather patterns have adverse impacts on the stability of yields of rainfed crops like rice and wheat. The erratic nature of rainfall is reflected in the occurrence of droughts in the eastern parts of the state and floods in the northern districts. Crop yields are also constrained by the ineffective use of rainwater, lack of rainwater harvesting, and inefficient use of irrigation water.
Addressing these issues requires investments in irrigation infrastructure, including flood and watershed management.
Use of Inputs and Their Impact on Yields
The availability and use of other inputs, like fertilizers, pesticides, and seeds, also determine crop yields. The use of fertilizers in Bihar is high, at 201 kg/ha in 2018–19, with seasonal variations of 224 kg/ha in rabi and 177 kg/ha in kharif. Nearly half of the total fertilizer used is urea. However, the disproportionate use of nitrogenous fertilizers (N), relative to phosphorus (P) and potassium (K), has contributed to imbalanced nutrient use and associated deficiencies in the availability of micronutrients in the soil. Fertilizer policies should be reoriented to correct such an imbalance and support the achievement of increased yields in a sustainable manner.
Seed Quality and Adoption
Crop yields are also a function of the quality of seeds. The adoption of high-yield varieties of rice and wheat seeds was higher in the Western IGP than in the Eastern IGP, contributing in part to low productivity in the east.
In Bihar, seed replacement rates for paddy and wheat are below 50 percent, in contrast to those for maize, which are close to 90 percent. Pulses, too, are characterized by a low seed replacement rate.

District-Level Variations in Crop Yields
There is considerable district-level variation in the yields of staples and pulses within Bihar. These variations can be understood in terms of underlying differences in factors such as climate, irrigation infrastructure, and availability of inputs in each of the four agroclimatic zones. Next, we discuss the yield potential and constraints to growth for rice and wheat at the district level.

Rice Yield Variations Across Districts
Rice is the main kharif crop and is cultivated across all districts in Bihar. Rice yields are highest in the southwestern districts, exceeding 2,500 kg/ha in Rohtas, Arwal, Aurangabad, Kaimur, and Bhojpur. Conversely, the lowest rice yields are observed in the northwest and southeast zones of the state.
These differences are primarily a function of climate and irrigation facilities. The southwest zone benefits from sufficient southwest monsoon showers, whereas the northern districts often face flood-like conditions. This is reflected in the low yields seen in flood-prone districts like Siwan and Gopalganj in the northwest zone. Additionally, rice yields are low in Bhagalpur, located in the southeast, which is prone to drought.

Challenges of Floods and Droughts
The incidence of floods and droughts has been associated with significantly lower water productivity for rice in Bihar. Flood-prone areas are constrained by waterlogging and a poor drainage system, while drought-prone areas struggle with inadequate water conservation.
In this context, crop management practices, such as establishing and adhering to an optimum date for transplanting rice; adopting hybrid rice varieties that are of shorter duration and therefore less susceptible to drought; supplemental post-establishment irrigation; and/or direct seeding of rice, show promise for increasing rice yields. Examples of stress-tolerant, high-yield varieties include Swarna Sub 1 and Varshadhan for flood conditions, and Sahbhagidhan cultivars for drought conditions. Adequate supply of such improved cultivars will have to be ensured.

Irrigation Infrastructure and Its Impact on Yields
The variations between agroclimatic zones are also influenced by the availability of irrigation infrastructure. The southwest accounts for nearly 30 percent of the gross irrigated area in the state, with a mix of canal and tube well irrigation. It also accounts for the greatest share of area under rice cultivation, which is irrigated.
Gains in rice yields in the lower and mid-Gangetic plains will depend on investment in infrastructure for rainwater harvesting and checking the overexploitation of groundwater. Such policies can positively impact yields by improving water productivity in the region.

Wheat Production Challenges and Solutions
Wheat production in Bihar is constrained by three critical factors:
Temperature During Grain-Filling Period: High temperatures during this period reduce yields.
Application of Water and Nutrients: Insufficient water and nutrients lead to suboptimal growth.
Incidence of Diseases: Diseases such as rusts and leaf blight adversely affect wheat production.
These factors have led to wheat yields in Bihar being half that of the Western Indo-Gangetic Plain (WIGP), despite similar potential based on soil properties.
Wheat Yield Variations
The highest wheat yields are found in the southwest (Rohtas, Bhojpur, Nalanda, and Patna) and northwest zones (Begusarai, Sitamarhi, and Samastipur). Conversely, the southeastern districts of Sheikhpura and Jamui have the lowest wheat yields in the state.
Addressing Wheat Yield Gaps
Wheat crops in Bihar face heat stress due to shorter winters and the early onset of high temperatures. Additionally, late rice harvests delay wheat planting, exacerbating heat stress and leading to lower yields. This results in a yield gap of nearly 2.5 tons per hectare in the Eastern Indo-Gangetic Plain (EIGP).
Early Sowing: Early sowing with long-maturing varieties has been associated with a reduction in this yield gap. Surface Seeding & Zero-Tillage (ZT) Wheat: Techniques such as surface seeding of wheat in standing rice crops or sowing zero-till (ZT) wheat using ZT drills can prevent delays in sowing and associated heat stress.
Role of Irrigation in Wheat Production
The northwest zone, which receives the highest amounts of winter rain in Bihar, supports higher wheat yields as the main rabi crop. Both the northwest and southwest zones have the largest shares of gross cropped area that is irrigated, with 35% and 30% of the state's irrigated area under wheat cultivation, respectively.
Given that two-thirds of wheat is grown under partial irrigation, improving irrigation infrastructure and access is crucial for boosting yields. Significant reductions in the yield gap in Bihar have been achieved with increased irrigation.
Fertilizer Use and Wheat Yield Improvement
Higher rates of fertilizer application, particularly potassium, are associated with a 6.5 kg/ha reduction in the wheat yield gap in Bihar. Although fertilizer use is higher in the northern zones, most of the fertilizer used is nitrogen rather than phosphorus and potassium. Therefore, the priority of fertilizer policy should shift from nitrogen to potassium.
Increasing Cropping Intensity
Cropping Intensity Overview
Cropping intensity refers to the number of times the same land is cultivated each year, with three main cropping seasons in India: kharif (harvested in fall), rabi (harvested in winter), and zaid (harvested in summer). Farmers have the potential to cultivate land more than once per year.
According to the Bihar Economic Survey (BES) for 2017–18, 56% of Bihar’s total geographical area was net sown, covering approximately 53 lakh hectares. The gross cropped area was about 75 lakh hectares, resulting in an average cropping intensity of 144%. Cropping intensity varies significantly across the state, with northern districts showing intensities between 1.65 and 2.24, while southern districts exhibit lower intensities of 1.6 or less.
Factors Affecting Cropping Intensity
The lower cropping intensity in southern districts is partly due to water constraints, leading to post-kharif fallow periods. There is significant potential to increase cropping intensity by investing in traditional irrigation systems such as the Ahar-Pyne. However, agricultural intensification must be supported by adequate inputs, like water and fertilizers, to avoid reducing water productivity and negatively impacting rice yields.

Diversification of Cropping Systems
Importance of Agricultural Diversification
Diversifying cropping systems not only improves yields but also enhances nutritional outcomes by providing a variety of nutritious foods throughout the year, aligning with SDG2.1. Diversification toward horticultural products (fruits and vegetables) and dairy products (milk, meat, and eggs) can boost incomes and contribute to nutritional security in Bihar.
Types of Diversification
Crop Diversification: This involves reallocating land from staple cereals to other crops, such as coarse cereals, pulses, fruits, and vegetables. Diversification can occur by redistributing existing cultivable areas or bringing uncultivated areas, like fallow lands, into production.
Livestock Diversification: Rearing small and large ruminants and poultry can provide additional income and supply protein-rich foods, including milk, eggs, and meat.
Recent Trends and Factors
Recent analysis of Bihar’s agricultural sector shows that diversification has been a key driver of crop output growth from 2001 to 2017. The shift toward growing coarse cereals, pulses, and commercial crops like sugarcane, linseed, and vegetables reflects this trend. The extent of successful diversification depends on:
Land Productivity: The productivity level of the land influences the ability to change crop types.
Market Linkages: Strong market connections are crucial for the successful introduction and commercialization of diversified crops.

 
5.3.1 Pulses
Impact of the Green Revolution
The Green Revolution’s focus on rice and wheat led to a reduction in the cultivation of nutrient-rich coarse cereals and pulses. In Bihar, pulses now account for less than 10% of the gross cropped area. Between 2002–03 and 2016–17, the area under pulses decreased by 20%, despite increases in the minimum support price (MSP) and policy initiatives under the National Food Security Mission aimed at boosting pulse production and procurement.
Current Status of Pulses in Bihar
Pulses contribute to less than 5% of the total food grain output in Bihar. Over the past five years (2014–19), the output of pulses has remained relatively stable. The productivity of pulses in Bihar is higher than the all-India average of 800 kg/ha, maintaining a steady rate of around 900 kg/ha as of 2018–19.
Regional Distribution and Yields
More than half of Bihar’s pulse area and output is concentrated in the southwest and southeast agroclimatic zones. Districts such as Patna, Aurangabad, Nalanda, and Buxar are notable for their high pulse production and productivity. These regions benefit from favorable conditions for pulse cultivation, contributing to their leading status in the state.

It is largely rainfed, with very little cultivation taking place on irrigated land (Figure 5.24). Yields of pulses are constrained due to several factors, including:
Low productivity lands
Frequent pest and disease problems
Lack of assured markets
Inadequate irrigation
Cultivation on inferior lands
Limited extension services and technology transfer
One of the main factors limiting yields of pulses is the lack of high-yield, short-duration seed varieties. The available stress-tolerant, high-yielding varieties need to be provided through improved supply chains. The lack of quality seeds is also reflected in the low seed-replacement ratio for pulses in Bihar (Figure 5.25).
Opportunities for Diversification
The diversification into pulses can take place by bringing nearly 2.2 million hectares of rice-fallow land under pulse cultivation as a rice-lentil system. These lands have sufficient residual moisture for growth of short-duration pulses, like lentil, moong, urad, and lathyrus. Area expansion can also take place by:
Intercropping short-duration pulses like moong or urad with sugarcane in the spring and summer.
Promoting pigeon peas as post-monsoon pulses in northern Bihar.
Introducing black gram and moong bean as winter crops in rice-fallow areas of northeastern Bihar.
Investment is needed in infrastructure to reduce postharvest losses, which account for nearly 10 percent of the total pulse production. The relatively higher procurement price for pulses also offers an incentive for increasing the area and output of pulses (Figure 5.26).
TARINA's Role in Diversification
“One of the main factors limiting yields of pulses is the lack of high-yield, short-duration seed varieties. The available stress-tolerant, high-yielding varieties need to be provided through improved supply chains.”
TCI’s Technical Assistance and Research for Indian Nutrition and Agriculture (TARINA) program has promoted a diversification of production systems by focusing on the cultivation of vegetables, pulses, and oilseeds in the Munger district of Bihar. This intervention aimed at increasing the availability and accessibility of nutritious foods for smallholder farming households.
SMART Model Trials
TARINA introduced the Sustainable Multi-species Agricultural Resources Model Trials (SMART) in Bihar. SMART develops mixed, sequential cropping models for farmers with small and marginal landholdings for the intensification of their production. Key features include:
Cultivation of mixed crops of maize and pulses, or oilseeds and pulses.
Integration of pulses and vegetables into existing cropping systems.
To create an enabling environment and pathway for increased adoption of nonstaples, an integrated approach of providing technical inputs and capacity-building interventions has been used. The availability and accessibility of quality seeds played a major role in encouraging farmers to cultivate different varieties of pulses and vegetables, depending on their diet preferences and market demands.
Community Involvement
In Bihar, this intervention has relied on leveraging existing community platforms, like self-help groups and other interest groups, to promote crop diversification, especially among women farmers. This intervention directly relates to:
SDG2.1: Ensuring access to nutritious foods
SDG2.3: Focus on women
Impact
In 2016–19, there has been an increase in the number of households that have diversified their production systems, reflected in both an increase in area under nonstaples and an increase in the average number of crops cultivated (production diversity score). The diversified production also translated to increased consumption diversity.

Maize Production in Bihar
In addition to rice and wheat, the other major food crop grown in Bihar is maize. It accounts for 20 percent of the total food grain output in the state. Bihar is the third largest producer of maize in the country. Farmers choose to substitute paddy with maize, given its increasing importance as a commercial crop, to meet the demands of the food processing industry and its use as poultry feed. Bihar has a special advantage with respect to maize production: unlike most other states, it produces maize in the rabi season. This means that maize from Bihar fills a demand from processing units during this time—a demand that originates largely from the growing poultry industry. The share of area under maize cultivation has marginally increased over the last few years from 7.6 percent in 2002–03 to 9.3 percent in 2016–17. As of 2018–19, a little over 10 percent of the area under cultivation was being used for maize. The northern districts account for 75 percent of the area under cultivation and output from maize cultivation in the state.
Risks in Maize Cultivation
Maize cultivation faces three risks in Bihar: inputs, prices, and yields. One of the important inputs of production is access to irrigation. The northern districts where maize cultivation is concentrated face flood-like conditions during the monsoon season. Nearly two-thirds of the area under maize cultivation in Bihar is irrigated and is within the northwest and northeast agroclimatic zones. Maize is, however, less water intensive than rice and wheat, a characteristic that allows it to be relatively more resilient at times of water stress.
Maize yields in Bihar are below the yields at the national level and lower than those in states like Andhra Pradesh and West Bengal. Since the northeast zone’s share of production is greater than its share of area, maize yields are expected to be highest there; this can be seen in districts like Purnea, Araria, Supaul, and Katihar, where yields were in excess of 7,000 kg/ha in 2018. These yields are significantly higher than the state average of 4,700 kg/ha. One of the main inputs that is associated with yields of maize in Bihar is the use of hybrid varieties, in particular single-cross hybrids (SCBs). Yield improvements can occur as efforts are stepped up to promote the adoption of hybrid maize, particularly in the rainy season in districts where such adoption is low. In flood-prone districts where adoption is poor, maize cultivation can be carried out on raised beds and ridges that reduce the risks associated with excessive water. Concurrently, seed supply chains need to be strengthened to ensure timely availability of hybrid seeds.
Fruits and Vegetables
Importance
Horticultural products like fruits and vegetables offer a source of diversification of income for farming households and are important contributors to nutritional security in the state. Bihar accounts for about 5 percent of total fruit production in India and slightly less than 10 percent of the vegetable production. The government’s emphasis on horticulture is evident in the latest agricultural roadmap that focuses on organic cultivation under the Bihar State Organic Mission (which has a dual objective of sustainable farming and increased incomes) and rooftop cultivation, as part of the Chief Minister’s Horticulture Mission. Yet, even though the productivity of land is higher for horticultural crops, compared to cereals, the overall level of diversification is low in Bihar, as reflected by the fact that rice, wheat, and maize continue to account for 80 percent of gross cropped area.
Recent Trends
Both the area and production of fruits and vegetables in Bihar have increased over the 3-year period from 2016–19. Fruits and vegetables accounted for approximately 6 percent of the cropped area and 40 percent of the total value of output. Despite adequate irrigation and a change in consumption demand toward these products, the increase in the area under cultivation of fruits and vegetables has been slow. The average yield for fruits has remained constant at 14 tons per hectare over 2016–18, slightly below the all-India yield of 15 tons per hectare. For the same period, the growth in productivity for vegetables has been greater in the state, increasing from 17.4 tons per hectare in 2016 to 19.4 in 2018, surpassing the 18 tons per hectare average for the country as a whole.
Comparative Advantage
While horticultural crops offer a diversified source of income for smallholder farmers, their share of the value of output in Bihar declined from 47.5 percent to 42 percent between 2002–03 and 2016–17. Even so, Bihar has a comparative advantage in growing fruits and vegetables. This is because the share of area under fruits and vegetables in Bihar is greater than the corresponding share in the country as a whole. Bihar also stands to benefit from the growing demand for fruits and vegetables, with the decline in per capita consumption of cereals and an increase in that of fruits, vegetables, and animal-sourced foods.
Irrigation Methods
One of the factors important for horticultural crops like fruits and vegetables is improved methods of irrigation. For example, drip irrigation has been associated with less water usage and greater yields for important fruits and vegetables.

Increased Incomes and Constraints
Increased incomes can only be realized when binding constraints are addressed. The main constraints for the promotion of fruits and vegetables are:
Lack of Proper Marketing Arrangements
Poor Infrastructure
Inadequate Institutional Support
The cost of being able to access markets is typically very high for small and marginal farmers, primarily because of:
Low Economies of Scale
Reduced Bargaining Power
Limited Connectivity to Markets
Inability to Obtain Information on Prices and Quality Standards in Real Time
The lower prices that these farmers receive often are the result of the presence of several intermediaries between the farmers and retailers. In this respect, further development and improved functioning of Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs) can enable farmers to benefit from economies of scale to sell their produce at remunerative prices because of collective bargaining. In addition to facilitating access to markets for final output/produce, FPOs can also help farmers to access:
Markets for Credit
Inputs
Technology
The collective model also helps to reduce costs, such as those related to:
Quality Determination
Transportation of Produce
FPOs can also enable better linkages to financial services.
Contract Farming and Diversification
In addition to FPOs, contract farming can also help promote diversification by assuring market access and incomes from agribusiness firms in the state. Contract farming is a form of vertical coordination between buyers and sellers wherein:
The Farmer and Retailer/Wholesaler Agree in Advance on:
Time of Delivery
Quantity
Quality
Variety of Produce
This arrangement reduces uncertainties. Diversification of production activities also needs to be supported by public extension activities that inform farmers about:
New Varieties of Crops
Methods of Cultivation
Technologies
This is especially important for women farmers.
Postharvest Infrastructure
Given the perishable and seasonal nature of produce, investments need to be geared toward ensuring adequate postharvest infrastructure along the supply chain, including:
Processing Centers
Cold Chains for Transport
Cold Storage Warehouses
As of 2019, the cold storage capacity in Bihar was 1,437,767 metric tons. In addition to promoting storage units and a cold chain for marketing, the Government of Bihar is also promoting:
Organic Farming
New Technology
High-Yield Varieties
Micro-Irrigation Methods
Use of Quality Planting Materials
Livestock
Overview
In addition to crop diversification, another avenue for increasing incomes is diversification to include livestock systems. The livestock sector in Bihar has grown in recent years, with its share of gross state value-added increasing from:
5.4 Percent in 2013–14 to
5.6 Percent in 2018–19
The sector accounts for nearly 20 percent of total rural income. An expansion of the livestock sector stands to benefit from increasing per capita incomes in the state, accompanied by urbanization and an adequate network for transportation.
Challenges
Poor animal health, poor breeding, and poor reproduction each account for nearly one-third of animal losses in Bihar. Inadequate feed and nutrition account for an additional 30 percent of livestock losses (Bihar Livestock Sector Analysis, CGIAR–BMGF). Any improvements in the productivity of livestock will depend on:
Health and Breed Quality of the Animals
This is reflected in the Bihar Livestock Master Plan that, together with the agriculture roadmap, aims to promote:
Quantity and Quality of Veterinarian and Preventive Care Services to minimize animal morbidity and mortality.
Regular vaccination campaigns are a key component of this strategy—the number of animals immunized increased from:
26 Lakh in 2014–15 to
555 Lakh in 2018–19
Furthermore, nearly 31 lakh animals were covered as part of artificial insemination programs.
Government Initiatives
The Government of Bihar is placing an emphasis on:
Increasing Productivity and Production of Livestock to improve per capita incomes in the state, particularly for women and land-poor households.
Livestock ownership contributes to household incomes, especially for households that are landless or have small or marginal landholdings. Goats, in particular, are an important source of additional income for small and marginal farmers and play an important role in poverty alleviation.
Livestock Sales
Milk and animal sales are the two major constituents of sale from livestock in Bihar. Together, they account for: 90 Percent of Livestock-Related Monthly Receipts

ENSURE YEAR-ROUND ACCESS
TO NUTRITIOUS FOODS IN MUNGER, BIHAR
In Bihar’s Munger district, the TARINA program is promoting homestead horticulture as a strategy to ensure that farmers have increased access to and availability of diverse foods throughout the year. Using community platforms like self-help groups, farmer field schools (FFSs), and other interest groups, TARINA designed a unique combination of technical inputs, which includes:
Generating an understanding and awareness of the role kitchen gardens can play in ensuring nutritious diets;
Developing a package of practices focused on land preparation, sowing methods, and pest management;
Arranging for a subsidized provision of quality seeds in a timely manner through the National Horticulture Research and Development Foundation (NHRDF) and private agencies.
As a result, the proportion of households with kitchen gardens in Munger increased from 20 percent in 2016–17 to 44 percent in 2018–19. Furthermore, production diversity in homestead gardens has increased from 3–4 types of vegetables to up to 13 (including green leafy vegetables). This intervention directly relates to SDG2.1 (ensuring access to nutritious foods throughout the year).
Associated market linkages are also being supported by the government through the Rural Backyard Poultry Scheme 2014–15. On a larger scale, the Integrated Poultry Development Scheme is promoting the construction of broiler poultry farms, aimed at enhancing employment and meat production. Bihar has witnessed an increase in the production of milk, eggs, wool, meat, and fish for the period 2014–19.

Promoting Small Ruminants in Munger, Bihar
Promoting small ruminants such as goats and poultry, dairy production through improved animal health services, and advanced livestock management are strategies employed by the TARINA program in Munger. The objective of this intervention is to strengthen the income pathway for improved nutritional outcomes. As a result of the intervention, there has been an increase in the share of households that own livestock from 63 percent to 77 percent. This increase has resulted from a multi-pronged program that identified and responded to existing constraints and challenges in a comprehensive manner.
Intervention Details
Pillars of the Intervention
Improved breeding, feeding systems, preventive health care, and better market linkages are the pillars on which the intervention with small ruminants is designed. These are mediated through buck user groups and women farmers’ collectives.
Achievements
Over the last four years, TARINA has focused on improving animal health and services management in Munger by way of vaccination and deworming camps for farmers with goats, as well as training on feed management.
Figure 5.37 shows that in Bihar, farmers were able to increase their income from livestock from Rs. 1,847 per household to Rs. 2,642 per household. This intervention relates to SDG 2.3 of increasing incomes.
Livestock Production Statistics
Egg Production
Egg production increased from 6 million tons in 2011–12 to nearly 10 million tons in 2018–19, with an annual growth rate of 14.6 percent between 2014 and 2019.
Meat Production
Meat production registered a modest increase from nearly 3 lakh tons in 2014 to 3.6 lakh tons in 2019. Fish production also saw growth from 4.8 lakh tons in 2014–15 to 6 lakh tons in 2018–19, with an annual growth rate of 6 percent.
Dairy Production
The per capita availability of milk has increased from 147 grams in 2004–05 to 228 grams in 2016–17, though this is still lower than the national average and just above the minimum daily intake recommended by the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR).
Challenges and Opportunities
Yield Improvement
Despite increases in livestock numbers, there is room for improvement in yield for milk, eggs, and meat. For instance, Bihar’s milk production rate is among the lowest in the country at 3.7 kg/day/milking animal.
Market and Credit Access
An increase in market density through new markets and strengthened institutional arrangements related to procurement is required. Additionally, access to credit is crucial for smallholder farmers to invest in inputs or infrastructure. In rural Bihar, the credit-to-deposit (CD) ratio was low at 34 percent in 2018–19 compared to the national average of 78.2 percent. Small finance banks and Kisan credit cards (KCCs) are important for increasing financial inclusion.
Recommendations
Irrigation and Crop Management
Assured access to timely irrigation is essential for productivity. Investments in irrigation infrastructure and crop management practices are recommended to increase yield potential.
Diversification and Market Systems
Diversification of the cropping system and improved market access are important for income gains. Enhancing market density, promoting FPOs, and expanding road infrastructure are crucial.
Women’s Role and Nutritional Outcomes
Women can influence the crop mix for both household consumption and market sale. Ensuring that women are included in agricultural transformations aligns with SDG 2.3.
Food Safety-Net Programs
Improvements in yields and diversification can increase the supply of micronutrient-rich foods in Bihar’s food safety-net programs, such as ICDS, MDM, and PDS. Efforts should be made to ensure all eligible households are covered and to increase local processing and food safety regulations.

Role of Women’s Empowerment for Improved Nutrition
SDG2.1 focuses on ensuring access to nutritious foods throughout the year by all members of households. To achieve an equitable intrahousehold distribution of food that meets the nutrition requirements of all individuals, there must be:
An adequate quantity of food at the household level
Adequate quality of food available
An understanding of the nutrition needs of different members of the household
Distribution of food according to the needs of each member of the household
Women play an important role in all these areas. The pathway from women’s empowerment to improved nutrition can be examined using various direct and indirect indicators, such as women’s education and control over income, and the extent to which women have input in decisions related to agricultural production, food purchases, preparation, and consumption.
Empirical Evidence
Empirical evidence suggests that empowering women improves nutrition for mothers, their children, and other household members. For example, more than half of reductions in all child stunting from 1970 to 1995 can be attributed to increases in women’s status. Some studies have found that women’s discretionary income has a greater impact on child nutrition and food security than men’s, and among agriculture interventions that have improved nutrition, women’s active involvement has been a consistent element.
SDG5 and Women’s Empowerment
Women’s empowerment is a key component of the SDGs. “Women’s empowerment is essential for supporting transformations to sustainable development.” In fact, SDG5 calls for gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls. In this chapter, we focus on a set of areas in which the status and/or participation of women can directly or indirectly influence nutritional outcomes, and therefore, determine the progress toward achieving SDG2 in Bihar. This is founded on women’s ability to influence intrahousehold food distribution, based on existing social norms, knowledge, skills, and how decision-making power is shared within households.
Box 6.2: TCI–TARINA Research on the Empowerment–Nutrition Pathway in Munger, Bihar
TCI–TARINA estimated empowerment levels of women involved in agricultural activities in Munger, Bihar based on the Women’s Empowerment in Agriculture Index (WEAI). After adapting the WEAI to the agricultural context of India, it was found that more than 80 percent of women in agricultural households are disempowered across five domains of agriculture: input, resources, control over income, leadership, and time use. The main drivers of this disempowerment are a lack of membership in agriculture-related self-help groups and a lack of ownership of agricultural land.
Box 6.1: Women and Nutrition Outcomes
TCI–TARINA research indicates women play an important role in determining nutritional outcomes. This can be seen in terms of their input in decisions related to the purchase and preparation of food. They are also key influencers in accessing health care for themselves and their children.
Women’s Empowerment in Agriculture
While increasing yields and diversification will influence food availability at the household level, women’s ability to access resources and make decisions in various spheres of agriculture, like production, marketing, sales, and so on, can have implications for their nutritional outcomes and that of their households. This is because women can influence the availability of food by having inputs in the mix of crops that are cultivated. They can play an important role in influencing which types of crops will be grown and sold, and which types of allied activities that the household should engage in, like livestock rearing or kitchen gardens. This is especially true in Bihar, where women constitute a dominant share of the agricultural workforce. Women can also influence how income is spent on food purchases and their time spent in agriculture can impact time available for childcare and food preparation activities.
SDG2.3 and Bihar’s Agricultural Roadmap
SDG2.3 focuses on increasing productivity and incomes of women farmers “including through secure and equal access to land, other productive resources and inputs, knowledge, financial services, markets and opportunities for value addition and non-farm employment.” A similar recognition of the role that women play in agriculture and an emphasis on facilitating their empowerment in agriculture by ensuring access to inputs, equipment, and credit, in addition to strengthening self-help groups, is also reflected in Bihar’s agricultural roadmap.
Impact of Women’s Empowerment on Dietary Diversity
Women’s input and decision-making in agricultural activities can influence how land is allocated to the cultivation of different crops, holding the potential to move away from the state’s predominantly cereal-centric production patterns toward one that incorporates nonstaples. Such a diversification of the cropping pattern can take place on the field or in the form of kitchen gardens/vegetable gardens.
Data source: TARINA Baseline Survey, 2017
For a given level of household per capita food purchases, we find that women who are empowered in agriculture have significantly higher dietary diversity scores, as compared to women who are disempowered. More specifically, women’s ability to influence production decisions and membership in self-help groups correlate with improved dietary diversity.

Women’s Economic and Social Security
Economic and social security for women is integrated into several state government schemes, including:
Lakshmibai Social Security Pension Scheme
Mukhyamantri Kanya Vivah Yojana
Mukhyamantri Nari Shakti Yojana
The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MNREGA) ensures women's participation by mandating that one-third of total person-days of work created be allocated to women. In Bihar, women's share of MNREGA employment stood at 52 percent in 2018–19.
While women make up the majority of agricultural workers in Bihar, their ownership of agricultural land remains extremely low. Land is a crucial asset that influences both agricultural production and income. In the state, less than 13 percent of women own agricultural land, and their landholdings are predominantly marginal and smaller than male-owned landholdings. This disparity affects their ability to diversify production and enhance productivity.
Barriers to Land Ownership
Indian women face numerous barriers to land ownership, including:
Lack of Awareness: Many women are unaware of their inheritance rights.
Reluctance to Claim Property: Women may hesitate to claim property from hostile family members.
Skewed Implementation of Laws: Gendered social discrimination persists due to uneven law enforcement.
One major issue is the mediation of women’s land rights in India through various personal laws and customary practices, rather than through legal procedures.
Wage Gap and Economic Impact
Differences in women’s participation in agriculture and land ownership are reflected in a wage gap. Women’s incomes are crucial not only for overall household income but also for influencing decisions related to nutritional outcomes, such as food purchases and spending on nutritious non-staples. Women’s wage rates lag behind men’s, with women in Bihar earning, on average, 80 percent of the corresponding wages earned by men.
Access to Credit and Financial Inclusion
Access to credit and decision-making regarding its use are vital for women in agriculture. Financial inclusion helps women access loans, credit, and safe savings options, which can alleviate poverty. Research indicates that closing the gender gap in financial inclusion can:
Smooth Consumption
Lower Financial Risks and Costs
Provide Security
Increase Savings and Investment Rates
Facilitate New Business Opportunities
Progress has been made in financial inclusion at both state and national levels. As of March 2018, Bihar had over three crore female bank accounts with a consolidated amount exceeding 60,000 crores. Women’s self-help groups, such as JEEViKA, have been instrumental in improving women’s socioeconomic empowerment and financial literacy through digital financial inclusion efforts.
Education
Poor nutritional outcomes often result from a diet lacking essential nutrients, with women playing a central role in household food decisions. Education is crucial for raising awareness about nutritious diets. Rural literacy rates in Bihar are below the national average, with fewer women being literate compared to men.
TCI–TARINA Research on Women’s Self-Help Groups
Women’s group membership has potential benefits, providing access to various resources and information. TCI–TARINA has been working to strengthen women's self-help groups in Munger, Bihar, using these groups to:
Promote Behavior Change Communication (BCC)
Increase Awareness on Homestead Gardens
Introduce Technologies for Reducing Drudgery and Postharvest Losses
The groups are also supported through:
Trainings
Interface Meetings with Market Value Chain Actors
Exposure Visits for Cross-Learning
Exposure visits and meetings have helped self-help group leaders understand federation management and the benefits of collective marketing. TARINA’s training has developed leadership skills among group members, leading to a 15 percent increase in self-help group membership in Munger over two years.
6.3 Recommendations
Women’s Empowerment in Agriculture
Women’s empowerment, specifically in agriculture, needs to be promoted not just as an end in itself but as a means for achieving improved nutritional outcomes. Ensuring women’s access to productive resources and enabling them to have greater input in decisions related to production, use of income, and time use are areas for targeted intervention. Since most women are engaged in agriculture, they need access to and ownership of inputs of production, like land, irrigation, seeds, and credit, as well as access to the information needed to effectively use them. To achieve this, public extension systems need to be strengthened to specifically address the challenges and constraints faced by women farmers.
Access to Gender-Specific Technologies
Access to gender-specific technologies can also have implications for nutritional outcomes. Agricultural activities at different points of time in the crop cycle can take up a lot of women’s time. This not only influences their own nutrition but also affects the time they have available for childcare and food preparation. In this respect, technologies aimed at reducing women’s drudgery should be promoted. Efforts to do so should consider the specific nature of the work done by women and address the challenges and constraints that they may face in adopting the technology.
Increasing Demand for Micronutrient-Rich Foods
Focusing on women’s empowerment is a strong channel for ensuring that there is an increased demand for, and purchase of, micronutrient-rich foods for household consumption. Women’s participation in the labor and produce markets will determine their wages and/or income from the sale of produce. For this, women need to be linked to markets by way of information, infrastructure, and institutional arrangements, like self-help groups or FPOs, that result in better price realization through collective bargaining power.
JEEViKA’s Livelihood Programs
JEEViKA’s livelihood programs have benefited women immensely by ensuring that incomes reach their hands. Empowered women with cash in hand can access nutrition-rich food for their families. If market signals are correct, JEEViKA programs can encourage women to take up the farming of nutrition-rich crops. JEEViKA’s kitchen garden program can be further improved to ensure a year-round supply of micronutrient-rich vegetables for the families. The JEEViKA program can help increase incomes by plugging into poultry and dairy value chains. As productivity and production of nutrient-rich vegetables and animal-sourced foods increase, they will be more accessible to the poor.
Support for Women in Fisheries and Small Ruminants
Women play an important role in managing fisheries and small ruminants in Bihar. Technology and market support to such women can contribute to their incomes immensely, which can then be directed toward higher demand for nutrition-rich food. The Department of Rural Development can use its MGNREGA program to help the landless and women get work on projects that could transform soil and water conservation across the state, especially the drier regions of southern Bihar.
Nutrition Awareness and Behavior Change Communication (BCC)
As discussed in this chapter, women play a crucial role in influencing not just the quantity and quality of food available but also its preparation and distribution among members of the household. Nutrition awareness and behavior change communication (BCC) campaigns need to explicitly focus on what makes a diet nutritious and why it is important, with an emphasis on seasonal foods that can be locally sourced, in addition to the needs of vulnerable groups like infants and pregnant and lactating mothers. Additional areas where BCC can focus are food safety and zoonotic diseases. Such BCC should leverage existing platforms like the JEEViKA self-help groups, together with schools and Anganwadi centers, to target women and children. These can be supported by experts from the Departments of Health and Education, as well as development organizations like CARE India and Project Concern International. Such collaborations can help tailor the BCC for different age groups, such as the Infant and Young Child Feeding program (IYCF) for infants.
7 Health Environment: Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene
Water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) make up the environmental health pathway for improved nutritional outcomes. Although agriculture directly and indirectly influences food availability, and women’s empowerment determines the intrahousehold allocation of that food, it is WASH-related factors that determine the eventual absorption of nutrients from dietary intake, and thereby, influence individual-level nutrient status. The absorption of essential nutrients can be adversely affected if individuals do not have adequate access to clean drinking water and sanitation facilities.
Poor health environments result in illnesses like diarrhea, which is the leading cause of child mortality in children under 5 in developing countries. According to the World Health Organization (WHO) and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), diarrhea caused by unsafe water and a lack of basic sanitation and hygiene claims the lives of more than 1.5 million children of less than 5 years of age every year. Approximately 700 million people still practice open defecation throughout the world, mostly in South Asia. According to NITI Aayog’s 2019 report, WASH factors are responsible for half of India’s undernutrition burden. The SDG agenda reflects the importance of WASH in the interactions between various SDGs. SDG6 focuses on ensuring availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all. Such an endeavor calls for expanding international cooperation and garnering the support of local communities in improving water and sanitation management.
In Bihar, two of the seven areas identified in the state government’s “Saat Nishchay” program relate to WASH—Har Ghar Nal Ka Jal (every household should have running tap water) and Shauchalaya Nirman Ghar Ka Sammaan (construction of toilets enhances the prestige of the home).
References:
Pingali and Ricketts (2014)
UN (2019b)
NITI Aayog (2019b)
7.1 Water: Access and Quality
Globally, there are close to 800 million people without access to drinking water. In Bihar, 64 percent of rural households had access to drinking water in 2017–18 (Figure 7.1). At the district level, the share of households with water within their premises ranges from 77 percent in Rohtas to 18 percent in Jamui (Figure 7.2).
Households access drinking water from different types of sources, like hand pumps, public taps or standpipes, and taps within their own homes. When such varied sources of water are considered “improved drinking water sources,” then we find that nearly all the households in the country, including Bihar, have access to water from an improved drinking water source.
However, hand pumps are the source for 95 percent of rural households, while piped water reaches less than 10 percent of rural households in the state. Based on the data published in the NITI Aayog’s SDG Annual Report 2020, sourced from the Ministry of Jal Shakti, the percentage of the rural population in Bihar receiving safe and adequate drinking water within their premises through piped water supply stood at just 5.76 percent in 2017 and increased to 7 percent in 2019. Thus, although Bihar has achieved universal coverage of drinking water, it is far from achieving universal coverage of piped water supply and providing quality water, which is consistent with international norms. Building on its water supply infrastructure, Bihar should aim to transition from a system that is dominated by hand pumps to a piped water system.
Since households predominantly rely on hand pumps for drinking water, an important concern is water quality. Unlike piped water, the water from hand pumps is not treated. Boiling the water, filtering it with a cloth, or using an electric water purifier are some of the ways in which households often treat water before using it for drinking or cooking. Recent data from the NSSO indicate that 98 percent of the households reported not treating water in any of these ways before drinking it.
Bihar’s overall performance in ensuring access to clean drinking water for its rural population is poor. This is evident in its performance on NITI Aayog’s Composite Water Management Index (CWMI) for effective water management. The Index ranks states based on their performance on a comprehensive set of water indicators. The overall Index ranges from 0–100, with a higher score indicative of a better performance. In terms of rural drinking water, the Index focuses on the service delivery of water to rural areas, which accounts for 10 points in the Index. The low scores for Bihar and India, in general, are indicative of the large gaps remaining in providing the rural population with water free of arsenic and fluoride contamination. A lack of access to clean drinking water brings the risk of waterborne diseases spread by water contaminated with viral or bacterial pathogens.
The Government of India has initiated policies like the National Rural Drinking Water Program (NRDWP) and the Jal Jeevan Mission, which aim to guarantee safe and affordable drinking water for all. The NRDWP was initiated in 2009 to ensure that every rural household has access to at least 55 liters of water per person per day, either within their household or within a distance less than 50 m, by 2024. Since 2017, the program has also focused on addressing issues of water quality stemming from arsenic and fluoride contamination in the country and in Bihar.

7.2 Sanitation and Hygiene
Overview
The health environment is determined by sanitation and hygienic practices within the home and at the community level. Poor hygiene and sanitation in and around the household often result in diseases such as viral hepatitis and malaria.
Open Defecation
Worldwide, and in India, one of the most significant contributors to a poor health environment is open defecation. Nearly 700 million people practiced open defecation globally in 2017. Ending the practice is explicitly mentioned in SDG6.2, as part of reducing inequalities in WASH. However, open defecation remains a widespread health and environmental hazard challenge in India. Open defecation not only reduces the quality of water for household purposes but also makes it unfit for drinking. It contributes to the conversion of large areas of land within the community into “fecal fields” that put the village, and consequently, water sources at risk of flooding with fecal material during rains. Windblown dust particles often deposited in or near water sources also potentially carry fecal pathogens. Even where water containers are used for fetching water, poor handling practices, such as placing them on the ground, could introduce fecal pathogens.
Situation in Bihar
As of 2015–16, more than 70 percent of the households in every district in Bihar practiced open defecation. While the remaining households reported using a latrine, the usage differs in terms of it being improved or not and shared with another household or not. At the state level, the proportion of households with improved and non-shared sanitation facilities stood at 20 percent. The share of households with latrine facilities is less than 30 percent at the district level. Less than 10 percent of households have latrines in some districts.
Swachh Bharat Mission
To address the persistent problem of open defecation, the Swachh Bharat Mission aimed to make India open defecation-free (ODF) by October 2, 2019. Based on the NITI Aayog SDG Index and Dashboard published in 2019, less than 35 percent of the districts in Bihar have been declared ODF. Several factors need to be considered when declaring a region to be ODF. These include not just the availability of latrines but also supporting infrastructure that relates to handwashing facilities, water, and soap, together with safe containment of feces and management of solid waste. Handwashing, in particular, promotes good hygiene and prevents the spread of diseases. In Bihar, while nearly 70 percent of households reportedly wash hands with soap and water after defecation, less than one-third do so before mealtimes.
Share of Households with Latrines
Share of ODF-verified Districts
Share of Sanitation Facilities
The move toward a better health environment can be supported by BCC strategies that challenge traditional practices, inform communities about the need for change, and support them with investment in infrastructure. Women’s education and awareness can play an important role in influencing household behaviors in these areas. In rural Bihar, the Lohiya Swachch Bihar Abhiyan (LSBA) brings together the state government’s Lohiya Swachchta Yojana with the central government’s Swachch Bharath Mission (rural) to end open defecation. Since 2016, JEEViKA self-help groups have been implementing BCC campaigns to support the successful execution of the program.
Agricultural Practices and Health
While water and sanitation comprise the immediate health environment, hygiene in certain agricultural practices can also adversely affect nutrient absorption. A lack of adequate storage methods can affect food safety, as seen with the presence of toxins in improperly stored grains postharvest. In this respect, food safety measures, like the use of airtight storage bags, should be promoted. Similarly, agricultural practices that use excessive amounts of chemical fertilizers and pesticides can have negative effects on health if these chemicals leach from the soil and enter the drinking water supply. There are also occupational risks that result from the nature of crop cultivation itself. For example, workers on rice farms have to constantly bend for long periods of time and stand or squat in waterlogged paddy fields that are often contaminated with bacteria, fungi, and chemicals. Flooded fields are also breeding grounds for diseases like malaria, tetanus, and schistosomiasis, all of which can adversely affect nutrient absorption. Women’s exposure to extreme seasonal activities and stress while carrying out manual agricultural tasks can negatively impact their own nutritional status. It has also been associated with lower birthweight for babies in India and Bangladesh.
7.3 Recommendations
WASH factors influence the absorption of nutrients in the body once food is consumed by an individual. Any policy for achieving SDG2 and ending all forms of malnutrition needs to factor in the role of the health environment. The existing programs of the national and state government concerning drinking water and sanitation largely focus on infrastructure development, such as drinking water facilities and sanitation systems.
Data Source
National Health Profile of India, Central Bureau of Health Intelligence & National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme (NVBDCP), Directorate General of Health Services, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
Water Infrastructure and Latrine Construction
Water infrastructure under the NRDWP and latrine construction under the LBSA. These programs can also be bolstered by campaigns that highlight the importance of WASH for nutritional outcomes. Health and family welfare departments can collaborate with the JEEViKA groups to spread awareness on the need for behavior change around issues like handwashing and open defecation. Similarly, the education department can implement awareness campaigns at the school level. Efforts to expand piped water should accentuate the link between it and increased time for women to spend doing alternate activities. Finally, investment in areas of food safety, like airtight bags for storing food, is needed, as are steps to address occupational risks, such as disseminating information about and assistance for waterborne diseases. This will require convergence between the health department and the agriculture and extension departments to inform farmers, especially women, of associated risks.
Policy Convergence
The food systems approach for getting to zero hunger in Bihar, as outlined in this report, highlights the multisectoral nature of the state’s malnutrition problem. It brings to the fore the need for a coordinated set of policies that reflect the multidimensional nature of malnutrition, from agricultural policies and household access to diverse foods to intrahousehold food allocation and WASH.
The Bihar State Nutrition Action Plan (2019)
The Bihar State Nutrition Action Plan (2019) focuses on the convergent actions required to address the immediate, underlying, and basic causes of malnutrition in the state. It recognizes the roles that the Departments of Women and Child Development (WCD), Health and Family Welfare, Agriculture, Education, Food and Civil Supplies, and Drinking Water and Sanitation can play, individually, in addressing malnutrition through existing schemes like the Integrated Child Development Scheme (ICDS), the National Health Mission, the Midday Meal Scheme, the Public Distribution System (PDS), the National Food Security Mission, and the Swachch Bharath Abhiyaan. A similar mapping of the various schemes/policies within each of these departments is also found in Bihar’s SDG Vision document. However, the current policy space lacks an explicit recognition of the need for convergence between these various departments.
Convergence at the Level of Objectives
Convergence at the level of objectives means that various departments work toward the same overarching goal of nutrition security. Thus far, the goals of food or nutrition security have been set in isolation, such as with the Department of Agriculture increasing the production of food grains or Poshan Abhiyaan reducing the prevalence of malnutrition. Given that SDG2 explicitly recognizes the role of agriculture for reducing hunger and malnutrition, what is required, first and foremost, is an incorporation of nutrition security as the broad objective for the various departments involved in agriculture and related fields. It could then be determined not just which aspect of nutrition security—doubling farmer incomes, improving productivity, empowering women, healthy environments—can be addressed by each department, but also how there can be synergies across departments. In practice, the nutrition-related activities of a department would feed into and reinforce the activities of other departments, and vice versa, empowering them all to better meet their nutrition-related goals. For this to work, a focus on nutrition security needs to be explicitly incorporated in the objectives and activities of the various government departments and ministries at both the central and state levels. To some extent, this is visible in Bihar government’s map of various centrally and state-sponsored schemes that contribute to the subgoals of SDG2. However, that map shows that individual departments like Consumer Affairs, Health, and Woman and Child Development (WCD) operate in silos, rather than working together to achieve a shared goal.
Convergence in Objectives at the Subnational Level
Convergence in objectives at the subnational level is critical for progress toward SDG2, since states play an important role in the design, implementation, and monitoring of policies on the ground. Implicit in such a localization of goals is the setting of nutrition-related targets at the local level. While the NITI Aayog recognizes the importance of a localized approach for achieving the SDG targets, it falls short on a union of objectives, especially at the local level. For instance, in the SDG India Index, each state’s performance on the SDGs is analyzed relative to national-level targets. Setting targets at the district level would make it easier to galvanize resources and ensure coordination. At the moment, district-level institutional mechanisms for collaboration between departments and sectors are in a nascent stage, especially with regard to implementation.
Bihar State Nutrition Action Plan 2019
The Bihar State Nutrition Action Plan 2019 outlines a workplan for achieving the nutrition goals of the World Health Assembly, as well as the SDGs, through its Manav Vikas Mission. The plan envisages a three-level administrative and monitoring framework for reducing malnutrition at the ward, district, and state levels. It recognizes the relevance of identifying vulnerable families and individuals at the ward level as a starting point to ensure that the various departmental schemes reach their intended beneficiaries. The implementation of the latter is expected to occur under the purview of the district administration, while the overall state plan will be overseen by a state-level Empowered Body on Nutrition.
Convergence in Implementation
A convergence of objectives around nutrition security needs to be followed by convergence in implementation on the ground. Teams from various departments should work together on a joint program of action through interlinked, coordinated activities, from the central level to the village level. At the village and district levels, teams should implement site-specific policies in a coordinated manner. At the grassroots levels, district-level bodies, like the District Development Coordination and Monitoring Committee (DISHA), and village-level bodies, like the Village Health Sanitation and Nutrition Committees (VHSNCs) and Village Education Committees (VECs), need to be empowered with key responsibilities to ensure the implementation of policies related to nutrition security.
Stakeholder Engagement
To achieve policy convergence, the Bihar government must enlist all stakeholders with a role to play in transforming nutritional outcomes in the state. Within the government, this includes the Departments of Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Fisheries on the production side, the Department of Food and Consumer Protection for procurement, and the Departments of Health, WCD, and WASH for programs related to nutrition awareness and behavior change. Additionally, convergence will also require the expertise of local development organizations, cooperatives like Sudha Dairy, and private sector players for markets and value chains. Finally, community-level platforms like self-help groups can be relied on for community mobilization and for layering the livelihood–agriculture–nutrition strategies discussed earlier in this report. Civil society can also contribute to this effort. The state (under the chief secretary) and district (under the collector/district magistrate) must make special efforts to ensure the participation and commitment of all relevant stakeholders. In all the above programs, engaging with the Panchayat and Department of Urban Affairs will be critical for the achievement of goals.
Mapping Departmental Roles
In Table 8.1, we map out how the roles played by different departments fit within the four quadrants of the TCI framework. For each department, we mention the specific central- and/or state-level schemes that are relevant, and in subsequent columns, highlight to which aspect of the agriculture–nutrition pathways they can contribute. The pathways are color-coded to reflect in which of the four quadrants they refer: Q1 – household income; Q2 – access to diverse foods year-round; Q3 – intrahousehold food allocation; and Q4 – nutrient absorption.
Challenges in Nutritional Outcomes
It is imperative to recognize that the slow progress toward improving nutritional outcomes, despite a number of policies and programs focusing on women, child health, and nutrition, is in part because of the lack of convergence and coordination between social safety-net programs, agricultural policies, and food security programs. For meeting the targets of SDG2, specifically, the Vision Document emphasizes the production and delivery of food grains and the absorption of nutrients therein. Bihar’s SDG Vision Document outlines a three-pronged approach to achieving its targets for SDG2. This focuses on:
Gains in agricultural productivity as outlined in the third Agriculture Roadmap (2017–22);
Improvement in nutritional status through MDMs, ICDS, and the National Health Mission (NHM); and
Achieving food security by way of the National Food Security Act (NFSA)/TDPS.
Policy and Programmatic Convergence
In this chapter, we use the TCI–TARINA food systems framework presented in this report to provide an illustration of concrete options for policy and programmatic convergence at the state, district, and village levels to achieve nutrition security in Bihar.
“It is imperative to recognize that the slow progress toward improving nutritional outcomes, despite a number of policies and programs focusing on women, child health, and nutrition, is in part because of the lack of convergence and coordination between social safety-net programs, agricultural policies, and food security programs.”
Ensuring Production and Supply of Locally Grown, Diverse, Micronutrient-Rich Foods, Including Animal-Sourced Foods
On the production front, a move toward nutrition security requires, first and foremost, an urgent reorientation of agricultural policies away from rice and wheat, toward non-staples like pulses, coarse cereals, fruits and vegetables, and livestock. The former reflects the focus on calorie sufficiency, which was the goal of the Green Revolution (GR), while the latter reflects the goal of nutrition security. GR policies crowded out nutrient-dense, non-staple crops, like coarse cereals and pulses. A “crop-neutral policy” that incentivizes the diversification of agricultural production toward non-staples is now needed.
During the last few years, production of hybrid corn in Bihar increased, much of which is sent outside the state. In many parts of north Bihar, fisheries and Makhana cultivation increased in areas with large numbers of bodies of water. Fisheries, small ruminants, dairy, and poultry have immense potential for growth in Bihar. JEEViKA can play a catalyzing role in transforming the agriculture and food sectors in Bihar with help from the Departments of Agriculture, Animal Husbandry, and Fisheries, and major food-based companies with significant interests and presence in the state, like ITC, Ruchi Soya, and Godrej Agrovet. International agencies like HarvestPlus can play an important role in scaling up production of biofortified crops.
The producer response to increasing production of non-staples has been low, even though non-staple prices are higher than those of cereals. Incentives for production remain in favor of rice and wheat, and markets for non-staples are poorly developed, following the abolition of the APMCs in Bihar and the limited presence of private sector players. Therefore, diversification of agricultural production will require a structuring of incentives like subsidies for inputs and investments in markets, credit, and input infrastructure. The Department of Industries can encourage investments in the food processing industry in specific crop-based production clusters of the state, while FPOs (formed by JEEViKA) or cooperatives can help aggregate produce that can be directed toward such clusters. The JEEViKA Special Purpose Vehicle for Agriculture Transformation (JSPVAT) could help catalyze the process and accelerate the learning curve. A massive investment in the procurement infrastructure for non-staples is needed from the government, as well as remunerative MSPs. Such steps would indicate a convergence in the objectives of the Ministries of Agriculture and Consumer Affairs.
Improving the Supply of Diverse, Micronutrient-Rich Foods in Safety-Net Programs
A convergence of the objectives of diversification of agricultural production providing diversified, nutritious foods through the state’s food safety nets is imperative. Existing government food-based programs offer an opportunity for supplying micronutrient-rich foods to the most vulnerable sections of the population—pregnant and lactating mothers, infants and young children, and the poorest households in the state. The range of foods provided through programs like MDM, ICDS, and PDS can be diversified in connection with the diversification of agricultural production, reflecting the change in focus from calories to nutrient sufficiency. Diversification will entail pulses and coarse cereals in the case of the PDS and the inclusion of these, plus vegetables and animal-sourced foods, in the case of the MDM and ICDS. Similar to the child-feeding programs, the government should also consider providing biofortified crops, like high-zinc rice and wheat, high-iron pulses, and orange-fleshed sweet potato, through the PDS. Efforts should be made to provide maximum coverage to all vulnerable segments of the population in all the food safety-net programs, including migrants who have returned home after the COVID-19 crisis and their families.
An increase in the supply of micronutrient-rich foods through the ICDS and MDM programs, as well as in the PDS, can be achieved when similar goals are reflected in the activities of other government departments and programs. The Department of Women and Child Development and the Department of Education can increase their cost allocations per child for the Anganwadi and school feeding programs. The enhanced allocation can be used to procure an increased quota of micronutrient-rich non-staples by ensuring coordination with other relevant stakeholders. For instance, milk fortified with vitamin A and vitamin D could be supplied in collaboration with Sudha Dairy. The Departments of Agriculture and of Animal Husbandry and Fisheries can provide technical support to the existing JEEViKA groups in their efforts to diversify their farming systems to include vegetables and fisheries. Biofortified crops could also be grown through the JEEViKA groups and supplied to Anganwadi, schools, and the PDS program. Take Home Rations (THR), prepared and supplied by JEEViKA groups to the Anganwadi, could be scaled up under appropriate food safety regulations for locally processed food.

8.2 Use of Locally Produced and Procured Material
The use of locally produced and procured material for preparing the THR would provide a boost to the local economy and ensure livelihoods for women. The Department of Food and Consumer Protection must be involved for changes to PDS supplies. Together with the Food Corporation of India (FCI), it must develop a mechanism for decentralized procurement and supply of millets, pulses, and other biofortified crops. Bihar could follow the direction of Chhattisgarh and Uttarakhand by providing 1 kg of pulses per person per month through the PDS.
8.3 Ensuring Demand for and Purchase of Micronutrient-Rich Food in the Market
Policy convergence for a nutrition-secure Bihar can also be conceptualized for the demand side. For starters, agricultural policies geared toward diversification with pulses, millets, and poultry and dairy value chains, as well as management of fisheries, can be targeted toward women. Empowered women, with cash in their hands, can both demand and access nutrition-rich food for their families. If appropriate market linkages and price signals are in place, production of diversified crops can ensure that incomes reach the hands of women. Technology and market support for women can help them to increase their incomes, which can then be directed toward higher demand for nutrition-rich food. Incomes for women can also be ensured through the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA), which through its projects can have the benefits of income generation paired with investments in soil and water conservation across the state. In addition to produce sales, demand for micronutrient-rich foods can also be met by encouraging households to cultivate annual nutrition gardens that will take care of some of their vegetable requirements throughout the year, especially green leafy vegetables.
8.4 Investing in Women’s Empowerment and Positive Nutrition Behavior
Women’s empowerment in agriculture should be leveraged as a pathway for improved nutritional outcomes. Extension services and input providers should ensure that women are able to access and own inputs of production, like land, seeds, fertilizers, and credit. At the same time, technologies that reduce women’s drudgery and time spent in agriculture should be promoted. Policies should focus on linking women to output markets by way of improved infrastructure and farmer producer organizations (FPOs). Such steps will ensure that women have access to income, which in turn can spur the demand for nutritious foods. At the same time, women can play an important role in influencing intrahousehold food allocation.
Positive nutrition behavior campaigns that address these issues can be implemented by bringing together government departments, development sector organizations, and public and private sector companies like ITC and NTPC, who have a presence in Bihar. For instance, the Department of Health can bring in their own expertise on the health aspects of improved behavior change practices. Agencies like Care India and Project Concern International can play a critical role in building the capacities of JEEViKA’s frontline and community-level staff and volunteers for behavior change campaigns. More than 900,000 women’s self-help groups have been formed across Bihar. These social capital-rich women’s institutions are being leveraged for various livelihood programs. These institutions also offer a wonderful opportunity to layer programs related to women’s empowerment and positive nutrition behavior. The Departments for Women and Child Development and for Education can work closely with the JEEViKA program to ensure that there is convergence in their efforts.
8.5 Increasing Investments in Water and Sanitation
WASH infrastructure in Bihar has been significantly improved in the last decade. There is now a need to build on those investments with regard to nutrition security. On the one hand, there is a need to ensure that all households have access to piped drinking water that is free from contaminants. This can be coordinated through the activities of the Departments of Public Health Engineering, Education, and Health and Social Welfare. On the other hand, there is a need to reinforce behavior change that is geared toward good hygiene practices. Departments like WCD, Health, and Education can design complementary BCC campaigns centered on these practices. The convergence of such efforts around the JEEViKA groups would catalyze these efforts and bring in an element of self-policing at the community level. The Department of Agriculture will also need to join forces with the Department of Health to address risks related to food safety, such as mycotoxin contamination, and crop cultivation, such as waterborne diseases from standing water.
9 Recommendations
Invest in the Agricultural Sector for Enhancing Incomes for Farmers
This report has presented a food systems approach for achieving SDG2—zero hunger—in Bihar. Central to that approach is the role that agriculture plays for improved nutritional outcomes. This is especially relevant for Bihar, where the rural population relies on agriculture as its main source of livelihood and bears the main burden of malnutrition. Small landholding size, low private investment, slow rates of technology adoption and farm mechanization, and recurrent incidents of flood and drought constrain agriculture in Bihar. Seed replacement rates for oilseeds and pulses are relatively low, while postharvest losses of horticultural crops like lychee and mangoes are high. To make matters worse, credit and marketing are weak, while connectivity, storage, and processing infrastructure are poor. Additional investments are required in all areas, including increasing the share of consumption of electricity for agricultural purposes that can kick-start the process of agricultural transformation in the state. There is a need for investment in the management of floods in north Bihar and in watershed and drought resilience programs in south Bihar. Increasing investments in surface- and groundwater-based irrigation systems and introducing small-scale group irrigation systems, like shallow dug wells, can help improve cropping intensity and productivity. Focused investments for enhancing productivity in dairy, fisheries, poultry (for both meat and eggs), and small ruminants could target marginal and landless communities. Continuing to provide support to FPOs would help aggregate the farm surplus for marketing purposes. In the absence of agricultural produce market committees (APMCs), Bihar must ensure that markets work for its farmers and the poor in general. The increased incomes, realized as a result of improved access to markets, can help transform nutritional outcomes by increasing smallholder farming communities’ demand for, and access to, more diverse, nutritious foods.
Promote Nutrition-Sensitive Policies for Enhancing the Supply of Nutrient-Rich Food
The broad objectives of Bihar’s food policy should be focused on nutrition security, that is, ensuring that households are able to access and afford diverse, nutritious foods throughout the year. This contrasts with the current focus on calorie sufficiency, a legacy of Green Revolution-era policies that promoted the production and consumption of staples, like rice and wheat, to alleviate hunger. Those policies now need to be reoriented toward the goal of nutrition security, given the persistent problem of undernutrition, together with the emergence of overnutrition, as reflected in obesity and noncommunicable diseases (NCDs). Such a reorientation will result in a diversification of production activities toward nutrient-dense non-staples, like coarse cereals and pulses; protein-rich, animal-sourced foods; and micronutrient-rich foods, like fruits and vegetables; thereby ensuring an increase in the supply of such foods. To achieve this, Bihar’s predominantly smallholder farming community will need access to irrigation, quality seeds, technology, extension services, and well-functioning markets. Promoting Makhana and fishery-based farming systems in north Bihar would diversify cropping systems, apart from making more fish available for consumption. Promoting pulses in the rice–fallow regions in high residual moisture zones, with improved technologies, would enhance pulses production while also improving soil health. Bihar has immense potential for enhancing fruit and vegetable production through the adoption of high-quality seeds and an improved package of practices. With Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) situated in every district of Bihar, technology dissemination for last-mile outreach should be given a boost. The private sector must be encouraged to ensure supplies of seeds appropriate to field conditions in the state.
Make Food Safety Nets Nutritionally Diverse
The three main food safety nets—the MDM, ICDS, and PDS—can be used as channels to make diverse, nutrient-rich nonstaples affordable and accessible to the poor by adding millets and pulses in the PDS supplies and increasing the proportion of vegetables and pulses in the ICDS and MDM programs. Bihar should consider providing milk, eggs, and fish through its MDM and ICDS programs to improve the nutritional outcomes of children and women, while boosting growth for these sectors in the state. Bihar could aim to replicate what Odisha is trying by providing fish in food safety-net programs that target children. Supplies to food safety-net programs could also include provisioning for fortified foods like fortified milk and biofortified foods, like high-zinc wheat and rice. HarvestPlus has been promoting high-iron pulses in Bihar, which could be introduced in the MDM and Anganwadis across the state. Bihar has also been piloting nutrition gardens in government schools in rural areas, and that effort can be scaled up and spread throughout the state. Efforts should be made to provide maximum coverage to all vulnerable segments of the population in all the food safety-net programs, including the migrants who have returned home after the COVID-19 crisis and to their families.
Invest in Women’s Empowerment for Improved Health Outcomes
Women play an important role both as nutrition gatekeepers for their families and as participants in agricultural activities and decision-making. Research has shown that women who are empowered in agriculture are less likely to have micronutrient deficiencies and more likely to consume a diverse diet. Therefore, women need to be supported by ensuring their access to resources and input in decisions related to agricultural activities. At the same time, women also benefit from both awareness campaigns that highlight the importance of nutrition and support for nutrition-sensitive diversification activities, like kitchen gardens and backyard poultry raising. Fortunately, the JEEViKA program in Bihar has been focusing on social and behavior change communication interventions among women across the state. Change has been visible on the ground, but efforts must be increased to ensure that the empowered women act as agents of social change.
Invest in WASH to Aid Nutrient Absorption
To improve nutrient outcomes, there needs to be a recognition of the health environment’s impact on nutrient absorption. Efforts to increase the supply of, and demand for nutritious foods will be reflected in improved nutritional outcomes when conditions related to WASH are sufficiently in place. There must be investment in BCC programs related to open defecation and ensuring the supply of contaminant-free, piped drinking water. WASH interventions are especially important in the flood-prone areas of north Bihar, where every year communities suffer due to the breakdown of water and sanitation infrastructure and the spread of waterborne diseases like cholera. Bihar must also ensure safe drinking water that is free of harmful microbes and excess arsenic, fluoride, and other heavy metals. Related agricultural issues, like the loss in quality of food during postharvest storage, can be addressed through the use of airtight bags. The Departments of Health and WCD can also address waterborne illnesses related to the nature of cropping practices, like standing in water during rice transplantation.
SDG2 Goals Can Be Realized More Effectively If There Is Convergence in Policy Design and Implementation
Given that food systems comprise not just agricultural production, but also inputs, markets, women’s empowerment, and WASH, a convergence in the objectives and activities of the various government departments whose policies traditionally target a single aspect of the food system is needed. For policy convergence, the Bihar government must reach out to all stakeholders who have a role to play in transforming nutritional outcomes in the state, including various departments of the government, as well as development organizations, civil society bodies, and the private sector. Collaboration between stakeholders is needed at the start of the process, when policy objectives are conceptualized, all the way down to the implementation of activities on the ground. At the grassroots, there is a need for empowering village-level bodies like the village health sanitation and nutrition committees (VHSNCs) and village education committees (VECs) with key responsibilities ensuring the implementation of policies related to nutrition security.
Invest in Better Data Systems
Given that the SDGs are interconnected in nature and related to the point of convergence in the policy schemes discussed here, there is a need for a unified database that can be used for evidence-based decision-making. The Global Sustainable Development Goals Report (GSDGR) states that “tracking progress on the SDGs requires the collection, processing, analysis and dissemination of an unprecedented amount of data and statistics at subnational, regional and global levels.” In this regard, the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MOSPI), together with NITI Aayog, has prepared a National Indicator Framework (NIF) that includes a list of 297 indicators to measure progress toward each of the 17 SDGs. Each state can adapt the NIF to its requirements. According to the Voluntary National Review (VNR), about 60 percent of states in the country have developed a state indicator framework, and just 30 percent have put into place a district indicator framework. Putting into place a mechanism for the collection of high-frequency data at the subnational level that can be disaggregated by characteristics like gender, caste, rural/urban, and so forth, will be critical for effectively monitoring progress toward achieving the SDGs.
For SDG2, specifically, the SDG India Index relies on the following indicators to track progress made by each state:
Ratio of rural households covered under PDS to rural households where monthly income of the highest earning member is less than INR 5,000
Percentage of children under 5 who are stunted and underweight
Percentage of pregnant women and children under 5 who are anemic
Rice, wheat, and coarse cereals produced annually (kg/ha)
Gross value-added (GVA) in agriculture per worker
Some of these indicators can be made more sensitive to nutrition. For example, instead of including production of rice and wheat with coarse cereals, one could account for non-staples like pulses that are more nutrient-rich. Alternately, a composite measure of the nutrition diversity of a state’s agricultural production could be developed that accounts for not just crop production but also production and productivity in animal husbandry, horticulture, etc. Similarly, while the ratio of rural households covered under PDS reflects households that are vulnerable to food and nutrition insecurity, a sharper measure to reflect nutrition sensitivity might be the ratio of households that received key non-staples from the PDS or a composite measure that also brings in the ratio of women and children who benefit from the ICDS and MDM.
One of the biggest data gaps in India comes from the National Sample Survey Office (NSSO). The latest disaggregated data on food expenditures and prices is available for the year 2011 at best. Similarly, estimates around poverty rates and population rely on the census that is conducted every 10 years. Too much has likely changed in the following 10 years to base current and future policies on such old data. More frequent surveys are essential. A change in the indicators used to track food and nutrition in national surveys would also be helpful. For instance, the food groups considered by the National Family Health Survey should correspond to the FAO food groups so as to allow for international comparisons. Data on women’s empowerment should focus on indicators that are related to both agriculture and nutrition. In this respect, TCI–TARINA has led the way in designing, testing, and analyzing context-specific metrics, specifically around the role that women play in agriculture and its relation to nutritional outcomes for women and their families.


