BIHAR’S AGRICULTURE DEVELOPMENT:
OPPORTUNITIES & CHALLENGES
A REPORT OF THE SPECIAL TASK
A. Executive Summary
The State of Bihar, with a geographical area of 94.2 thousand square km, is divided by the River Ganges into two parts: North Bihar, with an area of 53.3 thousand square km, and South Bihar, with an area of 40.9 thousand square km. Based on soil characterization, rainfall, temperature, and terrain, three main agro-climatic zones in Bihar have been identified:
Zone I (North West Alluvial Plain)
Zone II (North East Alluvial Plain)
Zone III (South Bihar Alluvial Plain)
Each zone has its own potential and prospects. All these zones have Chaur, Maund, Tal, and Diara lands, which are submerged during the rainy season.
The percentage of the population employed in agricultural production in Bihar is estimated to be 81%, which is much higher than the national average. Nearly 42% of the state’s GDP (2004-05) comes from the agriculture sector (including forestry and fishing). The high concentration of population, largely dependent on agriculture coupled with low yields of major cereal crops, is the main reason for the high poverty ratio in the state. Consequently, about 42% of the state population is below the poverty line compared to the national average of 26%. As urbanization in the state is still very poor, nearly 90% of the population lives in rural areas. Bihar also lags behind the national average on all socio-economic indicators like per capita income, average size of operational holdings, per capita cultivated land, percentage of village electrified, road length per thousand sq km, per capita deposit, per capita bank credit, credit-deposit ratio, male-female literacy, and life expectancy.
The gross and net sown area in the state is estimated at 80.26 lakh ha and 56.38 lakh ha, respectively. The intensity of cropping is 1.42%. The principal crops are paddy, wheat, pulses, maize, potato, sugarcane, oilseeds, tobacco, and jute. Rice, wheat, and maize are the major crops. The average yields of rice and wheat are 1.45 and 2.19 t/ha, respectively, compared to the production potential (experimental yields at research farms as well as realized in frontline demonstrations) of 4.5-5.0 t/ha. Similarly, the average maize yield of the state is about 2.38 t/ha compared to its yield potential of 6 t/ha. Winter maize is a success story, where farmers have realized yield levels of 6-8 tonnes/ha. Similarly, Boro Rice (summer rice) has a realization of 6-8 tonnes/ha. Even though the state is rich in soil and water resources, its average yields of rice, wheat, maize, and sugarcane are only about 32%, 44%, 40%, and 38% of the potential yields, respectively. Sugarcane production and the sugar industry hold great potential in Bihar. The state’s share in the country’s production is 4 to 4.5 percent and ranks 10th among the sugarcane-producing states. However, Bihar has the lowest sugar recovery rate in the country at 9% compared to the national average of 10.36%. Thus, there is considerable scope to increase the productivity of these important crops in Bihar. All these factors clearly reveal that Bihar has great potential to be a prosperous state.
Although horticulture (fruits, vegetables including tubers and mushrooms, spices, honey, medicinal and aromatic plants) occupies 15% of the land area, the income generated from horticulture is much higher. The state has a monopoly in the production of litchi and makhana and continues to grow various fruits, vegetables, spices, and floriculture is catching the imagination of people, reflected in their growing interest across the state in the diversification of horticulture. Reviewing the current status, constraints, and potential, it is evident that there is ample opportunity for the development of horticulture in the state.
Bihar has a long history of chronically unprofitable state-owned companies and their unpaid staff. However, Sudha, a dairy cooperative, is a shining exception and one of the most successful enterprises of its kind in India. It has more than 6,000 outlets covering 84 towns and more than 260 villages. However, the health of animals and their productivity are causes of concern. Among livestock, cows and buffaloes are more important for value addition. Goat rearing and poultry also have much potential. Effective health management, breed management, and institutional support would be of great value to the people and the state.
The state, with its abundance of water bodies, has very high potential for fisheries and aquaculture, but this has not been fully realized. In the past, efforts were made to establish infrastructure through a World Bank-assisted project but with limited success. Main factors responsible for this are non-availability of fingerlings, scientific production systems, and policies. The state should bring the necessary aquarian reforms (granting rights of water bodies to fisher folks) and modernize its aquaculture industry through establishing competitive production and internationally accepted hygienic supply chains.
Despite the strength of the agriculture sector, it is paradoxical that this sector is much below its potential. Agricultural productivity in Bihar was much better compared to other states in the 1950s but is now much below the national average. In the last two years, there has been appreciable growth due to improved seeds, technologies, and inputs, but there is still a long way to go to achieve responsive agriculture. This would require infrastructure, technology, and inputs. R&D has a vital role to play. There is inequitable distribution of water for irrigation, inadequate number of shallow tube-wells, ineffective use of rainwater, and lack of conjunctive use of different irrigation waters, which are areas of concern.
There is almost no system of organic farming, which has tremendous prospects for accelerated agricultural productivity. Urgent attention is needed in this area. Moreover, the Tal and Diara lands can only be irrigated by overhead sprinklers, but farmers in Bihar do not own overhead sprinklers due to their poor economic status. The quantity and quality of the use of inputs, such as fertilizers and seeds, in the state are also far below the desired level. Considering that quality seed is fundamental to the establishment of a productive system, the highly unsatisfactory status of availability of quality seed (seeds, quality planting material, fingerlings, and semen) to the farmers is one of the most serious concerns in Bihar. Moreover, institutional support in terms of hassle-free, timely, and adequate credit and agricultural insurance are also much below the requirement. A large number of small and marginal farmers are not part of the institutional farm credit system. This needs urgent attention. The farm gate price of most commodities is low, which means farmers do not get remunerative prices. Departments of Agriculture, Floriculture, Animal Husbandry, Fisheries, and Sugarcane are not geared up to take technologies to the field. Similarly, the Agriculture University in the state is not well equipped to address these issues. Overall institutional arrangements and the entire farm-related delivery mechanism are very weak and need urgent attention.
Agriculture is the single largest private sector occupation in Bihar and can be considered the riskiest business. Hence, the goal of the agricultural production system should be to maximize the income of land-owning and landless rural populace to improve their livelihoods. The vulnerability to income and consumption shocks makes it imperative to develop formal agricultural insurance mechanisms to cope with such risks. The traditional yield insurance schemes have failed in managing the risks of poor farmers as evidenced by their historically high payouts and poor penetration rates. There is a need to develop effective risk management strategies to cover potential losses in yield and hence incomes.
To achieve the desired levels of productivity, immediate steps are needed to improve infrastructure – such as power, rural roads, and marketing in particular – and arrange for the supply of quality seeds, balanced use of fertilizers, adequate machinery, required changes in land policy, a farmer-friendly extension service, and an effective credit delivery system in keeping with the adequate credit absorptive capacity of the farmers in Bihar. All these could provide a bright future for Bihari farmers.
B. Recommendations
Given the low average yields of most commodities, the huge gaps between the demonstrated and generally realized yields, the low farmers’ income, and widespread rural poverty on one hand, and the richness of the natural resources and the socio-political expediency to liberate the people of Bihar from poverty and hunger on the other, business as usual will not yield the desired results. A holistic system-based approach is needed to simultaneously enhance productivity, profitability, equity, and environmental sustainability through synergistically integrating crop, cash crop, horticulture, livestock, fisheries, agroforestry, watershed-based soil and water management, social capital formation, agro-processing, and marketing in an end-to-end mode. Under a decision support system, the problems and their solutions must be disaggregated as per the location-specific resources, needs, and aspirations, calling for synergy among research, technology, extension, farmer, community-based organizations, markets, and public policy. All these would turn Bihar’s challenges into opportunities and help Bihar to emerge as the "Granary of India". Bihar’s aim must be to realize 5-6% annual agricultural growth in order to sustain its overall economy.
The Key Recommendations for Accelerated Agricultural Development in Bihar are as follows:
Bridging the Existing Yield Gaps

The gap between the state average productivity and potential is very high due to technology adoption and inputs. Therefore, bridging the existing yield gaps by making adequate availability of quality seeds and other technical inputs to farmers would be the first and foremost requirement for improvement of crop productivity. Crop-specific and zone-specific strategies should be adopted at the farmer level to derive maximum benefit. Bihar needs specific development strategies for North and South regions of the state.
There should be a specific program to multiply the best quality breeder seeds and distribute them to farmers. The Seed Corporation should be revamped, and another agency on the pattern of Tarai Seed, 'Pusa Beej' should be started. This will not only help the availability of seeds to the farmers but also seed sector could become one of the enterprises. The Seed Village concept should also be encouraged by providing breeder seed and technological inputs. Successful experiments have been conducted in Bihar under Zero Tillage, Bed Planting, System of Rice Intensification (SRI), and Site-Specific Nutrient Management Systems. Besides, efforts should be made to promote contract farming in maize and certain horticultural crops for which the state has huge potential. Dairy Cooperatives being a success in Bihar need further support for expansion and to enhance the health and productivity of livestock. There should be further expansion and revitalization of the fisheries and poultry sectors, which hold high potential, particularly in light of changing consumption patterns.
Efficient Use of Modern Inputs and Balanced Use of Fertilizers

Efficient and optimal use of modern inputs like quality seeds, chemical fertilizers, and other macro and micro nutrients is key to productivity improvement on a sustainable basis. Therefore, farmers should be enabled to access and use modern farm inputs in an optimal and efficient manner. Large-scale demonstration, use of nutrient and water-based soil and tissue tests should receive major emphasis. Soil testing technology is available but lacks the capacity to function. Revamping the laboratory for efficient delivery systems is essential. Efforts should be made to promote organic production technology, including the use of bio-fertilizers and bio-pesticides.
Development and Maintenance of Rural Infrastructure

Rural connectivity is key to raising farmers’ productivity and income. Therefore, utmost priority should be given to improving infrastructure in various aspects. The aim should be to target key constraints like poor water management, rural power supply, easy credit availability, and market access. Steps should also be taken to encourage renewable sources of energy. The state has the highest potential for small hydropower projects, wind energy, bagasse-based co-generation power from existing and proposed sugar factories, Jatropha on wastelands, and rice husk-based biomass gasification, biogas, and solar energy.
Flood Control, Drainage, Water Management, and Mitigating Drought

Lack of efficient on-farm water management is considered one of the major constraints for low productivity and poor economic status of farmers in Bihar. About 41% of the total cropped area in the state is flood-prone, and there is not much scope for improvement in yield due to water logging, poor drainage, and water management. In such areas, it is essential for the state to make large-scale investments in drainage and utilization for fisheries. Flood control will also need attention for desilting of rivers and strengthening of embankments. As far as drought-prone areas are concerned, there is a need for water conservation and improving water use efficiency through rainwater harvesting, education of farmers, and the use of modern methods of irrigation. Rainwater harvesting should be a major strategy to meet irrigation needs of crops. However, the state has abundant groundwater resources which could be optimized. Shallow tube wells are the quickest means of tapping groundwater. This is now possible due to the government’s dynamic efforts on village electrification.

(v) Human Capital Formation and Strengthening of Agricultural Extension Services
Twenty-first century agriculture is knowledge and technology based and human capital development is a must. Approach to knowledge and technology adoption by the farmers are directly related to the level of their education. Dilapidated condition of human development institutions and weak institutional structure are a road block in the overall development of Bihar. Education and health should, therefore, be given the first priority for Bihar’s farm population. Besides, strengthening of agricultural research & development, appropriate to Bihar’s topology and crop profile should be an integral part of agriculture development strategy. There should be proper coordination among different agriculture extension institutions like Krishi Vigyan Kendra, Agriculture Technology Management Agency (ATMA), Rajendra Agriculture University, Kisan Call Centres, State government, financial institutions, farming community at large. Training programmes for farmers at panchayat and block levels should be organized on a regular basis for adopting modern technologies more effectively.
(vi) Effective R & D Support
Efficient R & D is a building block for responsive agriculture. It has been experienced that investment on agricultural education and research has been most productive. The state has one Agricultural University with 5 major campuses and has done excellently well in last few years in terms of human resource development and research output. However, the University has not got the focus it deserves. Headquarters of the University, Pusa, is a heritage for agriculture research and education. Therefore, this University should get the status of National University, which should not only meet the needs of the state but also contribute to national agriculture. The University needs support for modernization of its infrastructure as well as research facilitation for scientists. Considering the size of the State’s agriculture, consideration be given for opening one or two more agricultural universities in Bihar. Sabour Agricultural College meets all the basic pre-requisites for conversion into a university.
(vii) Market Oriented Agriculture
Bihar produces large quantities of fruits, vegetables, and livestock products, but does not have appropriate infrastructure for value addition and marketing. The state should develop commodity specific agro-export zones and give necessary support to their marketization. As a matter of fact, with proper development of markets, cooling arrangements in storage and transportation, processing and maintenance of quality, through grading, standardization, packaging, etc., products like litchi, mango, makhana and banana and a few vegetables can be exported to other states and even beyond the country, which will help improve farmers’ income. In order to provide a level playing field for private participation in marketing, infrastructure and policy support be provided. Bihar is the first state, which has taken bold step for the reform of marketing by repealing the APMC Act, which was not conducive in modern competitive agriculture. However, there is a need for developing alternative model. The proposal of the Committee headed by Shri R.C.A. Jain be accepted to upgrade marketing of produce. A suitable model of contract farming specific to crops can be adopted to solve the problems of small and marginal farmers.
(viii) Strategic Agricultural Diversification
Traditional crop farming alone cannot provide adequate employment and income to a growing rural population. Already the pressure of population on land is quite high. Therefore, the state should develop location specific plans for accelerated and diversified growth. Diversification could be for crop varieties as well as other produce. More areas could be brought under pulses, oilseeds, maize and diversification to horticulture, livestock, and fisheries should find greater role. Horticultural diversification should cover fruits, vegetables, mushrooms, flowers, medicinal and aromatic plants. There is a scope for coconut, oil palm, and cashew in the state. This would involve not only proper planning activities, but also the creation of necessary infrastructure, institutions, and policy support.
Fisheries and poultry, the two most important areas having a high potential, need special attention. Districts with high productivity of gram and oilseeds call for urgent action to increase the area under these crops. Government can provide support either directly or indirectly through incentives to the private sector for supply of seed/planting material, marketing, processing, etc. This is one area which is most suitable for contract farming. The contract farming is now a well-accepted institutional arrangement to realize economies of scale, promote technology adoption, and supply of needed quality inputs. The establishment of a Horticulture College at Nalanda in this respect is a welcome decision.
(ix) Revival and Revitalisation of Sugar Mills
Sugarcane is an important cash crop for farmers in North Bihar. In addition to providing additional employment, they are an important source of surplus power. Of the 27 mills established, only a few are in operation. Most sugar mills in the state are almost sick and, therefore, the farmers do not get a fair deal from them. With proper policy support, these mills can be revitalized to provide the necessary linkages for the growth of sugarcane in the state. The state has nearly 103 thousand hectares of sugarcane area which produces about 4249 thousand tonnes of sugar cane. In recent months, the Govt. of Bihar has held several rounds of meetings with major players in sugar industry in the country for revival of sugar mills with private sector participation. But not much headway has been made, due to land policy and incentive related issues. Karnataka model can help to solve the problem where under Contract Farming, Shri Renuka Sugar Mills have entered into an agreement with the farmers as shareholders based on the land owned by them. This sector needs urgent policy attention towards the rehabilitation of existing old sugar factories and opening of new sugar factories under the PP mode. This would open new opportunities for North Bihar farmers.
(x) Enhancing Farm Income to Make Agriculture Attractive
Since farmers have small land holdings, the agriculture income growth is highly essential to sustain. Strategic approach is needed to enhance the farm income and to create better on-farm opportunities. Agriculture not only provides pollination support to crops and enhances the yield, but it provides additional income. Vermi-composting has proved to be highly effective in converting the waste into wealth. No one can deny the role of good quality seeds of crops, planting materials, fingerlings, and good semen. This would need special attention. Conservation of agriculture to save the resources and sustain the agriculture in the competitive world is important. Integrated farming having a combination of crops, horticulture, livestock, fisheries, apiculture, vermiculture along with multiple use of water is becoming important. Similarly, farm waste, i.e., paddy straw could be used for mushroom culture. Evidently, apiculture, vermiculture, quality seed, conservation agriculture, integrated farming, and mushroom culture have proved to be a boon and need promotion by Bihar Govt. in a Mission Mode having integration with value addition and marketing.
(xi) Risk and Disaster Management
Given that more than 80% of Bihar’s population is dependent on agriculture and related activities and Bihar happens to be one of the most disaster-prone states in India, role of risk financing in hedging agricultural risk from climatic shocks becomes critical. It is imperative to develop sophisticated ways of market and government mechanisms for risk transfer. Pre-Disaster initiatives (ex ante) need to be given more impetus than Post-Disaster (ex post) Events. These initiatives aim to provide hitherto unforeseen resilience to the rural communities and also bring out transparency and efficiency to the whole effort. There should be separate risk management solutions for small and marginal farmers to hedge through futures trading and production risk management by way of index-based insurance with focus on providing Comprehensive Risk Management for vulnerable groups.
(xii) Bihar as a Granary for India
If proper thrust is placed on technologies, institutional direction, farm level support services, and all delivery mechanisms, following improved farm infrastructure including rural connectivity, Bihar can definitely emerge as the ‘Granary’ for India. It can also provide the major hubs on fruits, vegetables, and fisheries for both national and global markets. The entire economic growth processes in Bihar depend on the dynamics of agriculture.
There are successful experiments in different parts of the country, which if adopted, can provide an answer to various problems which Bihar is facing in its race to higher productivity levels. It would be better to avail of the readily available experience with a view to adapt that in keeping with the ground situation in Bihar. If above points are addressed, there is no reason for Bihar not to be able to condense the 30 years of development activity of Punjab to 10 years. It can then surely catch up with the present productivity levels of rice and wheat in Punjab and other cherished goals in maize, pulses, oilseeds, horticulture and livestock production in the next two five-year Plans. Fortunately for Bihar, the State has trained agricultural labour from Punjab. The Bihari labour which was responsible for the first Green Revolution of Punjab will now provide the momentum for the Second Green Revolution in their home State. Thus, there is a need for awakening with commitment to convert the weaknesses into opportunities and revamp agriculture which is a sole source of economic development. Bihar also needs to put a special focus on system of organic farming in the light of experiences available in India. This would bring faster results for increased productivity.
(xiii) Financial Implications
Poor rural infrastructure, outdated farm level delivery mechanism and lack of implementation
capacity, and a very low level of financial allocations through Five Year Plans have been the main reasons for low farm productivity and general poverty and unemployment in rural Bihar. If Bihar has to prosper, it is only by means of sustained agricultural growth. Therefore, in order to
implement the thrust of the proposed strategies and policies, Bihar would require a substantially
higher level of financial outlays during next 5-6 years (2008-09 to 2012-13). This is estimated at
Rs.27,055 crores. The current plan (11th Five Year) outlays for Bihar’s agriculture is Rs.1,698
crores, which is very meager. This would not only help Bihar in emerging a food surplus state but also help India from the emerging crisis of food insecurity. It would then be possible for India to realize its goal of 9-10% annual GDP. Thus, both Bihar and India would move towards the path of sustained economic development.
Tal, Diara, and Chaur Lands
In the south of the natural levee of the Ganga, there is a vast stretch of backwaters known as “Tal (low order monsoon stream)” lands extending from Buxar to Pakur where most of the rivers and rivulets coming from the south get lost. The estimated area under “Tals” is about 1.00 lakh ha. In addition to the Tal lands, the state has about 4 lakh ha of ‘Diara lands (saucer-shaped flood plain of a river)’ under the flood plains of rivers Ganga and Ghaghara. The state also has about 4 lakh ha of ‘Chaur lands (remnants of river course)’, which are highly suitable for fish farming. The Tal, Diara, and Chaur lands are inundated by water for varying periods and are difficult to manage.
Land Utilization Pattern
About 61.18% of the newly organized State is under cultivation as per the figures available for the year 2002-03. The percentage of fallow land in the same year is 6.75%. The corresponding figure for undivided Bihar prior to bifurcation was 42.77% and 16.02% respectively. Consequent upon the bifurcation of the State, forest area has dwindled to a meager 6.65% from 17.01%. The forest coverage thus compares very unfavorably with the national average which stands at around 26%. The Gross and net sown area in the State is 80.26 lakh ha and 56.38 lakh ha respectively. The intensity of cropping is 142%.
Distribution of Operational Holdings
As 77% of the state’s main workforce is employed in the agricultural sector, the average size of operational holdings in Bihar is only 0.75 hectare as against the national average of 1.41 hectare (Govt. of India, 2005). The share of marginal holdings having less than 1 hectare each is as much as 82.9% (Annexure II). Also, marginal and small holdings account for about 59.8% of the total operated area.
Floods and Droughts
Every year, Bihar faces the vagaries of flood and waterlogging. The total flood-prone area of the State is 68.80 lakh hectares, which is 73.06% of its total geographical area and 17.2% of the total flood-prone area in the country. A substantial proportion of the total cropped area (nearly 41%) gets frequently affected by floods. Flood situation is most severe in the northern plains of Bihar. This is because almost all the major rivers in the State enter Bihar from Nepal in this region. The bed slope of these rivers is very sharp in Nepal, and they usually enter the State on plain lands. Because of the sudden drop in bed slope, silt brought by the flow of these rivers gets deposited at their base and causes recurring floods (Annexure III).
It is a sad story that almost 100% of the gross cropped area in the districts of Araria, Muzaffarpur, Sheohar and 50 to 75% area in Begusarai, Katihar, Sheikhpura, and Sitamarhi is flood-prone. It has been estimated that during the kharif season, about 23% of paddy area remains waterlogged where the adoption of modern technology is either nil or low and consequently, the crop yields are low.
Similarly, there are frequent occurrences of drought in the districts of Munger, Nawada, Rohtas, Bhojpur, Aurangabad, and Gaya. The extent of irrigated area in these 6 Districts shows that, except for district Munger where the irrigated area is 26.4%, all the other districts have a high percentage of irrigated area. Zone III, where these districts are located, has an average of 1104 mm of annual rainfall. With such rainfall in the region and most of the districts having an irrigated area higher than the State average, it is a pity that they are still being identified as drought-prone. The Planning Commission has already sanctioned watershed development projects for 8 Districts of Southern Bihar – Banka, Jamui, Gaya, Munger, Aurangabad, Rohtas, Bhabua, and Nawada. Once implemented, there should be no problem of drought in the Southern Zone.
It is true that rainfall may be erratic. Bihar can certainly follow the example of Rajasthan where, with less than 400 mm of rainfall, the State has horticulture by rainwater harvesting like the Kund Horticulture Project of Rajasthan.
Structure of Agricultural Produce
Agriculture is at the core of Bihar’s economy. The contribution of agriculture and its allied sector to the state domestic product was 40% in 2003-04. Although this is a reduction from 48.5% in 1980, it remains among the highest in the country.
During 1980 - 1992, Bihar’s agriculture and allied sector grew at 1.6% per annum, compared with the national average of 3.1%. In fact, it was the lowest among most of the states. However, since 1993, growth in Bihar’s agricultural GSDP has accelerated. While the all-India agricultural GDP grew at 2.2% per annum between 1993 and 2003, the corresponding figure for Bihar was 2.7%, which was next only to West Bengal and Andhra Pradesh among the major Indian states. A study for the period 1995-96 to 2004-05 not only confirms the above findings but also shows that Bihar went ahead of both these states, though marginally (Annexure IV).
It may be stated that with the growing commercialization of agriculture, cropping pattern changes reflect the expectation of net return from the land possessed by the farmers. A bird’s eye view of the data in Annexure V will reveal that in TE 2001, the total value of farm output including livestock was Rs.3171 million (the share of livestock being Rs.913 million or about 29%). In food crops, fruits, and vegetables accounted for nearly 49.7% of the total value, followed by rice 19.7%, wheat 12.0%, pulses 3.7%, maize 2.9%, and other crops 8.7%. Among the livestock products, which accounted for 29% of the total value of agricultural output, milk constituted 49.3% of the total value, followed by meat 24.4% and other products 26.3%.
Bihar also produces about 2.6 lakh tonnes of fish annually. There are about 2 lakh hectares of permanent water area and 1.2 lakh hectares of seasonal water area in the state. Besides, about 5 lakh hectares of paddy area are under deep water condition, which can be exploited for fisheries. The fish production constituted about 1.85% of the state’s GSDP in 2004-05 (Government of Bihar, Economic Survey, 2006-07).
It may be seen further that the per hectare value of output of major crops in Bihar (Rs.3017) is a shade lower than that of all India (Rs.3576). Rice and wheat are the major crops of Kharif and Rabi seasons occupying nearly 3.7 and 2.1 million hectares respectively. In addition, maize is cultivated in about 4-5 lakh ha during Kharif and Rabi seasons respectively. Average yield of rice-wheat cropping system is 1.45-2.19 t/ha as against the production potential (experimental yields at research farms) of 4.5-5 t/ha. Similarly, the average maize yield of the State is about 2.38 t/ha as against its yield potential of 6 t/ha. Even though the state is rich in soil and water resources, the average yields of rice, wheat, and maize in the State are only about 32%, 44%, and 40% respectively of potential yields. Thus, there is considerable scope to increase the productivity of rice, wheat, and maize in Bihar. The State has the potential for the development of horticulture. Intervention for production, processing, post-harvest management, and marketing in order to avail maximum benefits under the National Horticulture Mission launched in the country, including 16 districts in Bihar, is expected to harness the full potential of this sector.
Chapter 2: Features and Present Position
A. Crop Husbandry
Agriculture is the mainstay of the state’s economy. Nearly 60% of the area under cultivation in Bihar is rainfed. A wide variety of crops, viz. cereals, oilseeds, pulses, fruits, and vegetables, are grown in Bihar. Principal crops in Bihar are:
Cereals: Rice, Wheat, Barley, Maize
Pulses: Gram, Lentil, Arhar, Khesari, Peas
Commercial Crops: Sugarcane, Tobacco, Jute
Horticultural Crops: Mango, Litchi, Banana, Makhana, Jackfruit, Guava, Water Chestnut, Potato, Betel leaves, Chilly
The major agricultural products of Bihar are cereals, pulses, oilseeds, and cash crops. However, cereals dominate the cropping pattern. The rice-wheat cropping system occupies more than 70% of the gross cropped area but productivity has remained low despite favorable soil, water, and climatic conditions. The yield per hectare of rice is around 1500 kg/ha against the national average of 2100 kg/ha. Rice and wheat are the staple food of the people of the state. Production of rice has decreased from 5442.6 thousand tonnes to 3775.4 thousand tonnes between the period 2000-01 and 2007-08. During the same period, productivity has also decreased from 1489 kg/ha to 1143 kg/ha. This decline in productivity is basically due to the replacement of upland rice by higher income-generating crops like pulses, oilseeds, and maize.
Similarly, in the case of wheat, production has declined from 4438 thousand tonnes to 3474 thousand tonnes between the period 2000-01 and 2006-07. Wheat production in the state is suffering from problems of delayed sowing, increased cost of production due to the rise in the cost of petroleum oil, lack of small-duration varieties which can be appropriately tailored into the rice-wheat system, and aberrations in weather conditions.
The yield per hectare of maize and pulses is, however, higher than the all-India average. Production of maize is also very good, and Bihar is one of the leading states in maize production. Maize has multiple uses, viz. baby corn, sweet corn, popcorn, and green corn. These different varieties are commercially very profitable. Maize is called the industrial crop of the 21st century due to its versatility in use as food, animal feed, and as raw material for ethanol, starch, and corn oil industries. As compared to the national average, production of maize is increasing in the state. As the data shows, the productivity of maize in Bihar (2541 kg/ha in 2006-07) is greater than that of All-India (1907 kg/ha). This crop is now replacing upland rice in the Kharif season and wheat in the Rabi season.
Autumn maize has the largest share of area under the crop, being 42 to 43 percent of the total, followed by Rabi maize 31 to 32 percent and summer maize 25 to 26 percent. Though autumn maize has the largest share in area, it contributes only 30 to 31 percent of the total production, only marginally higher than that of summer maize, which has a share of 29 to 30 percent. Rabi maize has a better yield rate than that of autumn maize and thus produces nearly 40 to 41 percent of the crop in the state. The crop is now replacing upland rice in the Kharif season and wheat in the Rabi season in Bihar. Although maize is produced practically in all the districts of Bihar, major maize-producing districts are Begusarai (10.5%), Samastipur (7.6%), Bhagalpur (7.6%), Khagaria (7.4%), and Purnea (6.8%). With rich water resources and available irrigation in the winter and summer seasons, the irrigated area under maize increased and so did the yields. Both traditional and hybrid maize are grown in all three seasons. Percentage shares of area under hybrid maize in the total maize crop of autumn and summer seasons are 40 to 43 percent and 70 to 73 percent respectively, and the production of hybrid maize in these two seasons constitutes nearly 43 to 45 percent and 71 to 72 percent respectively. However, the break-up of area and production in respect of hybrid and traditional varieties for the Rabi season is not available.
Pulses Industry

There is a good scope for the pulses industry also. In case of pulses, productivity in the state is greater than All-India. In the year 2006-07, in Bihar it is 735 kg/ha while in India it is 616 kg/ha. Gram, Tur, and Lentil are the major pulses grown in the State.

Oilseeds

Oilseeds cover less than 2 per cent of the gross cropped area of the state. The state’s position in the country in area and production is insignificant being less than 1 per cent each. Rapeseed and mustard are the major oilseeds crops in the state followed by linseed which is generally used as the cooking medium. The crop is grown in all the 38 districts and the produce is consumed mainly within the state itself as the consumers of the state prefer mustard oil to other edible oils. Major producing districts are West Champaran, Samastipur, Begusarai, Muzaffarpur, Khagaria, and Rohtas. These six districts together shared an area of 45 and 46 per cent during the years 2004-05 and 2005-06 respectively. Jute & mesta are the only fibre crops grown in the state, and the state’s position in area and production in the country is a distant second only after West Bengal.

Sugarcane

Among other commercial crops, sugarcane is important in the state. The state’s share in the country’s production is 4 to 4.5 percent and ranks 10th among the sugarcane-producing states. Sugarcane production and the sugar industry hold great potential in Bihar. In the case of sugarcane, production as well as productivity both increased between the period 2000-01 and 2006-07. In the year 2000-01, its production in Bihar was 3987.6 thousand tonnes and productivity was 42,648 kg/ha, while in case of all India, the same was 295,956.2 thousand tonnes and 68,577 kg/ha. However, in the year 2006-07, in Bihar, production increased to 4249.0 thousand tonnes and productivity increased to 41,252 kg/ha. While in case of India, production and productivity increased to 283,404 thousand tonnes and 64,615 kg/ha respectively. Area under sugarcane cultivation has also increased considerably in the State. (Annexure VI)

The Sugar Industry

The sugar industry is the largest agro-based industry in Bihar. It generates considerable employment in the farm sector directly as well as through ancillary industries and related activities. According to the estimate of 2006-07, the area under sugarcane cultivation is 117.2 thousand hectares, production accounts for 5338.8 thousand tonnes and productivity is 45,552 kg/ha against the national average of 70,469 kg/ha. Bihar has the lowest sugar recovery rate in the country at 9% against the national average of 10.36%.

Horticulture

National Achievements in Agriculture

The country recorded an impressive achievement in agriculture after the Green Revolution in the late sixties, which enabled the country to overcome widespread hunger and starvation, achieve self-sufficiency in food, reduce poverty, and transform millions of families. This happened despite the fact that India is home to 16.8 percent of the global human population with 4.2 percent water and 2.3 percent of global land. Most important changes now being noticed in agriculture at the national level are diversification, modernization, market orientation, and commercialization, involving the introduction of new crops and varieties, increased share of horticulture in cropping patterns, diversion in processing, and export-oriented production. Growing importance of horticultural produce could be attributed to increasing demand due to the growth of a health-conscious population and enhanced income. Thus, the task before the state of Bihar is to harness the opportunity by converting weakness into strength, which will need a paradigm shift in thoughts and approaches from traditional systems to knowledge-based and technology-driven systems with efficiency as a central point, involving farmers in planning and execution.

Agro-Climatic Diversity

The agro-climatic diversity in the State with its high rainfall distributed over a five-month monsoon and a reasonably long and moderate winter allows for a variety of horticultural crops to be grown. The agro-climatic conditions are eminently suitable for a whole range of vegetables; a variety of roots and tuber crops; perennial fruit crops like mango, litchi, guava, and limes; annual fruit crops like banana, pineapple, and papaya; and spices like ginger, turmeric, and chilly. Of late, floriculture is also showing excellent prospects. The state thus has possibilities for growing a diversified basket of vegetables, fruits, spices, tubers, flowers, and medicinal and aromatic plants.

Fruits

Major Fruits

Major fruits grown in the state are Mango, Litchi, Guava, Pineapple, Citrus, Banana, Papaya, and Ber. Mango is grown all over the state; main growing areas are Muzaffarpur, Vaishali, Bhagalpur, Darbhanga, Madhubani, Sitamarhi, Patna, and West Champaran. Litchi is mainly grown in Muzaffarpur, Vaishali, Sitamarhi, East and West Champaran, and Darbhanga of North Bihar region. Pineapple is grown in the northeastern part of the state, particularly in Kishanganj, Purnea, Araria, Katihar, and Saharsa districts. (Annexure VII & VIII)

Vegetables

Vegetable Production

Bihar ranks 3rd in vegetable production in the country and produces a variety of traditional and non-traditional vegetables. Climatic and soil conditions of the state are congenial for the production of different types of vegetables. However, it lacks the basic infrastructure for storage, packaging, transportation, organized marketing systems, and post-harvest handling facilities. Seed is the most important input that influences the output of vegetable crops. Vegetable production programs could be strengthened only if its seed production program is improved. Thus, the seed production program should be strengthened to give a boost to vegetable production. (Annexure IX & X)

Spices

Spice Production

A variety of spices are produced in Bihar. At present, Bihar produces about 20 thousand tonnes of spices annually from an area of nearly 15,081 ha. The important spices are Ginger, Turmeric, Chilli, Coriander, and Garlic. Chilli accounts for 47.6 percent of the area under spices and 39.5 percent of the production, followed by turmeric, which occupies 26.3 percent of the area under spices and accounts for 36.4 percent of the production in the state.

Area and Production of Spices in Bihar
Floriculture

Floriculture Industry

In India, many states like Karnataka, Tamilnadu, Maharashtra, U.P., West Bengal, and Delhi are producing flowers on a large scale and are also involved in the export of some commercial flowers. However, Bihar does not play any role neither in export nor in the domestic market. The area under loose flower production in the year 2001–02 was 44 ha, which has increased to 95 ha in the year 2002-03. Also, the production reached 1757 MT in the year 2002-03. Although during the year 2004-05, the production of flowers increased tremendously after the adoption of Field Demonstration/ Training programs in the state under Macro Mode Management/National Horticulture Board-sponsored program, there is still a need to give more emphasis to exploit the potential of the state.

Apiculture

Honey Production

Bihar is one of the leading honey-producing states in India. The main regions in which beekeeping is done are the districts of Muzaffarpur, Vaishali, Sitamarhi, East & West Champaran, Madhepura, Katihar, and Begusarai. Approximately 3,900 MT of honey was produced in the state out of the total country’s production of 8,400 MT in 2002. Bihar is the only state producing litchi honey on a commercial scale, and it should rank at par with some of the premium honey in the world market such as the Block Forest Honey of Germany and the Spanish Orange Honey in terms of its uniqueness and quality. Honey yield with the Italian honeybee species is the highest in Bihar as compared to other states with a production rate of 40 and 60 kg honey/hive/year under stationary and migratory beekeeping respectively. The processing industry has not kept pace with the increase in beekeeping in

Poultry
Poultry Share and Population Growth
Poultry – primarily relating to egg production – has just a 1.6 percent share in the livestock value of the state. There is an increase in the fowl population in the state during the period from 1997 to 2003. The fowl population has increased by around 58.3%, and the population of ducks etc. has decreased by 37.5% during the period. The total poultry has increased by 42.5% during the period. (Annexure XIV)
Egg Production and Supply
Eggs are available both from fowls and ducks. Over the years, egg production in the state also recorded a significant increase from 740 million nos. in 2001-02 to 1000 million nos. in 2005-06, over 35 percent increase. This was when the average yield of an improved layer was below 190 eggs per annum against a potential of over 350 eggs. On the other hand, productivity level of ‘deshi’ birds is less than 90 per bird per annum. It is estimated that only 10 percent of the requirement in the state is met by the production within the state. Although the demand for table eggs in the state is very high, the farmers are not very keen on commercial poultry development mainly due to longer gestation period, high feed cost, high overhead expenses due to smaller size of units, and poor infrastructure like power and transport. Lack of awareness on scientific management of poultry birds as well as perception of high risk in the activity by the bankers is also a serious constraint for the development of the sector. It is, however, encouraging noting that of late, the State Government is focusing on promoting layer farming and has accorded agriculture status to poultry farming. Andhra Pradesh and Maharashtra are the two major states which have made commendable progress in poultry, and Bihar should learn from their experience. It is also necessary to develop proper marketing along with storage and transport facilities in the state. (Annexure XV) gives details about egg production by fowls and ducks in Bihar State.
Veterinary Services, Extension, and Training
Institutional Setup
The number of institutions providing extension services to the livestock sector has remained stagnant over the years. There are 39 Veterinary hospitals, 814 Veterinary Dispensaries, and 29 mobile veterinary dispensaries under the State Animal Husbandry Department. As regards piggery, there is no pig breeding farm or bacon factory in the Government sector. (Annexure XVI)
Goat and Sheep Breeding
As regards Goat, Beetal breed goat farm and sheep breeding farm at Chatra, Black Bengal goat farm at Thaithaitanger, Bolba (Gumla) are now in Jharkhand state and no sheep and goat breeding farm is available in reorganized Bihar state.
Fisheries and Aquaculture
Current State of Fisheries and Aquaculture
Bihar is blessed with vast and varied fisheries and aquaculture resources. These resources are in the form of rivers, reservoirs, lakes, mauns, chaurs, irrigation canals, ponds, and community tanks. However, despite such natural resources and fish being a highly preferred food item, aquaculture and open water fisheries resources remain highly underutilized. It is high time for the state to make use of these resources for providing sustainable livelihoods to millions of poor rural communities. The major schemes taken up include production and supply of fish seed, development of Maun/Chaur, besides centrally sponsored schemes for development of aquaculture and welfare of fishers. The total fish production in the state is about 2.66 lakh tonnes with an average productivity of about 2.2 tonnes per ha per annum. However, the annual consumption of fish within the state is about 4.5 lakh tonnes. The underutilization of aquaculture resources, unscientific management of water bodies, and lack of entrepreneurship are some of the most obvious reasons for the gap between demand and supply.
Fish Production and Requirements
Bihar occupies the third position in inland fish production (2.66 lakh tonnes) after West Bengal (9.88 lakh tonnes) and Andhra Pradesh (6.80 lakh tonnes) as in 2003-04. It contributes about 1.6% of Bihar GDP. Bihar has bountiful natural resources of water in the form of 69,000 hectares of ponds and tanks, 90,000 hectares of ox-bow lakes, 35,000 hectares of waterlogged area, and many major rivers with a total length of 3200 km. The present fish production is about 2.675 lakh tonnes. The state produces 350 million fry against its current requirement of 2000 million. Similarly, the State requires about 4.5 lakh metric tonnes of fish for local consumption, and as such, there is a wide gap between the production and demand of fish.
Challenges in Fisheries and Aquaculture
The current state of disappointing fisheries and aquaculture development in the State is attributed mainly to poor institutional setup, almost non-existence of extension services, lack of adequate resources and infrastructure facilities, absence of a conducive policy environment, defunct fisheries cooperatives, lack of professionalism among fisheries personnel, fragmented social setup, poverty, and illiteracy among the primary producers, etc.
Future Directions
The challenge is how to negotiate with these impediments, where many of them do not fall under the purview of the Department of Fisheries, and employ a practical and effective management strategy for utilization of available resources. We need to work hard for exploring appropriate approaches and develop field-tested models to make this food production sector play a greater role in poverty reduction, food and nutritional security, sustainable rural livelihood development, government revenue, and overall contribution towards the betterment of the socio-economic conditions of farmers and fishers.
Given the strength and opportunities outlined in the preceding paragraph, it is high time that we set a goal for managing and developing the fisheries sector in Bihar, so that eventually Bihar becomes a model for sustainable fisheries development within the next ten years. (Annexure XVII & XVIII) Apart from these, there are numerous ponds and tanks having a water area of less than 0.5 ha, with a total water area of 15,000 ha suitable for fish culture.
Major Rivers
Ganga, Kosi, Sone, Burhi Gandak, Gandak, Punpun, Kamla Balan, Kareh are the major rivers flowing through the State.
Major Reservoirs
Reservoir fisheries potential is relatively poor compared to neighboring states of UP and Jharkhand. The total number of reservoirs in Bihar is 29. All the reservoirs of the State are of either small or medium category. Some important reservoirs are Badua, Chandan, Orhni, Phulwari, Nagi.
Fish Hatcheries
There are a total of 29 hatcheries in the state, out of which two are in the corporate sector, 1 under the Government, and 26 under private ownership. Besides, there are 121 Government fish seed farms and 33 FEDA supported farms. (Annexure XIX)
During 2004-05, the total fish production of the State was 2.675 lakh tonnes. The overall increase in fish production during the past four years from 2000-01 to 2003-04 was in the order of about 44,000 tonnes. A conservative estimate of fish requirement in the State is about 4.56 lakh tonnes (as per WHO, consumption requirement @ 11 kg/capita/annum) and it will reach over 8 lakh tonnes by 2020. The annual per capita fish consumption in the state is one of the lowest in the country, less than 1 kg/yr for nutritional security. To promote fisheries, the Department of Fisheries has 121 fish seed farms, out of which only 10% are in working condition. Presently, there are 29 fish seed hatcheries in Bihar of which 2 are under the corporate sector, and 26 in the private sector. In order to bridge the gap in the fish seed demand and supply, the government of Bihar has announced to set up one hatchery in each District of the State.
Aquaculture
Bihar is blessed with aquaculture resources in the form of freshwater tanks and ponds which cover a water area of over 69,000 hectares. Freshwater aquaculture in the State is being promoted through District level Fish Farmers Development Agencies (FFDAs) which provide technical, financial, and extension support to the fish farmers. The FFDAs have so far brought under scientific fish farming over 26,000 ha in various districts with an average fish productivity of around 2.2 tonnes/ha.
The share of aquaculture in the total fish production in Bihar is 40%. Indian major carps and three Chinese carps contribute to almost the entire production from aquaculture. Though no systematic farming of other candidate species is carried out, some of the other species like scampi, act fishes (magur and singhi), different species of murrel, are also being cultured.
Bihar has vast potential for commercial scampi farming. In 2003, MPEDA has shown on an experimental basis, the production of scampi to the tune of 1500 kg/ha/four months in polyculture with carp. Bihar may be considered as the ‘sleeping giant’ for freshwater prawn farming. Realizing its importance as a candidate species for culture and export, it can be taken up on a large scale, for monoculture or polyculture practices.
Socio-Economic Status of Fisher Population
The total fishermen population in Bihar is about 49.59 lakh, which is highest among the other states of India. About 50% (23.01 lakh) are engaged in fishing activities. The majority of these fishermen are of low-income and marginal status. The socio-economic status of fishers is very poor and they lack access to technology, finance, marketing, and other support services. This has resulted in low productivity and income. Improvement in the socio-economic condition of these fishers should be the prime agenda of the Department of Fisheries.
PROCUREMENT, STORAGE AND PRICES
A. Procurement & Price Support
Agricultural production is a function of technical inputs—seed, fertilizers, and water, etc. In addition to these, remunerative prices are also an equally important adjunct in this production process. It was during 1965 that the Minimum Support Price (MSP) Policy was introduced. MSP is announced every year for all the major crops, taking into account all the relevant factors including the cost of production. It did serve as a catalytic agent in the success of the Green Revolution. This price is uniform for the country as a whole. Bihar is in a very peculiar situation. Because of low productivity, farming in Bihar is not a very profitable occupation. The net returns per hectare of paddy cultivation in Bihar (based on cash expenses plus imputed value of family labor) worked out to only Rs.3215 in 2003-04 as against Rs.19289 in Punjab (CACP, 2006). Based on C2 cost, the net returns from paddy cultivation were in fact negative, i.e., – Rs.1263. Thus, even if there is potential for raising the yield level in Bihar, low productivity and low profitability would stand in the way of realizing such potential. In fact, the ratio of gross value of output to A2FL was only 1.35 in Bihar, as against 1.99 in Punjab. Similarly, in the case of wheat, the net returns per hectare, based on A2FL, were only Rs.4787 in Bihar as against Rs.15946 in Haryana and Rs.15755 in Punjab. Based on C2 cost, the net returns from wheat cultivation were negative in Bihar, i.e., Rs.177. The ratio of gross value of output to A2FL was 1.47 in Bihar, 2.17 in Punjab, and 2.10 in Haryana.

Unless paddy and wheat cultivation in Bihar is made profitable, farmers may not be induced to invest in land improvement measures for productivity growth and the much-desired acreage shift towards paddy and wheat in Bihar at the expense of area loss in Punjab and Haryana may not be forthcoming. Even maize does not seem to be a very promising crop in this regard. The net returns (gross value of output = cash expense plus imputed value of family labor, i.e., minus A2+FL) were only Rs.7625 and based on C2 cost, it was Rs.4450. The ratio of gross value of output to A2FL was 1.80. Even the neighboring state of Uttar Pradesh has relatively higher net returns from paddy and wheat cultivation. It would be further seen from (Annexure XXIX) that in several districts including Darbhanga, Katihar, Muzaffarpur, Nawada, Purnea, and Sitamarhi, there was hardly any change in total factor productivity at constant prices during the past three decades.

The frequent occurrence of floods and drought, as already stated, aggravates the problem further. The coefficient of variation in annual rainfall during 1980-81 to 2002-03 was 32 percent. Similarly, the prices of agricultural commodities fluctuate widely from year to year. The coefficient of variation in the farm harvest prices of paddy was as high as 45.4 percent during 1980-81 to 2002-03. In the case of wheat, it was 44.9 percent, and in maize, it was 38.9 percent. Thus, crop farming in Bihar is not only unprofitable at present but also unstable and risky. The coefficients of variation in the yields of rice, wheat, and maize were 23.4, 16.4, and 30.3 percent respectively. It has been further estimated that rainfall and market prices were the main determinants of rice output. About 71 percent of the variations in output were explained by variations in rainfall, irrigation, and farm harvest prices. Since variability in rainfall and farm harvest prices is high, the production process is quite risky. Along with low profitability, erratic rainfall and fluctuating market prices act as disincentives for farmers to invest in modernization of agriculture.

With around 90 percent of small/marginal farmers, the marketable surplus is not expected to be very high. All the same, market arrival of rice and wheat is of the order of 20-25 percent. But the quantity procured is rather negligible. This serves as one of the biggest disincentives for higher production of major commodities in the state. Since the plan envisages a much higher level of production, there is a need for improvement in the marketing system, density of markets, connectivity of the markets within the producing areas, dissemination of market intelligence, and institutional arrangement for procurement of the produce that comes to the market. The implementation of the minimum support price policy has always been poor in Bihar. Even though some surplus pockets of grains are emerging, the Food Corporation of India makes hardly any effective purchases. This has to change and the corporation has to make effective purchase arrangements.
B. Storage & Management of Produce
Nearly one-third of our horticulture produce, especially fruits and vegetables, is wasted mainly due to poor cold storage facilities. For the same reason, the country also experiences fluctuations in the prices of horticulture produce, particularly potatoes and onions. The loss of fruits and vegetables and spices due to inadequate post-harvest handling, transportation, and storage ranged between 25 and 40 percent of the total production in Bihar.
The Capital Investment Subsidy Scheme (CISS) for Construction/Expansion/Modernization of Cold Storage for Horticultural Produce was introduced by the Government of India. The objective is to promote modern cold storage to avoid spoilage of perishable horticulture and other items like dairy, meat, fish, chicken, etc., provide remunerative prices to the farmers, and provide business opportunities to cold storage owners throughout the year by establishing multipurpose cold storages.

The progress of the scheme has not been very encouraging in Bihar. Considering the annual production of perishable horticulture produce at 152.50 lakh MT in the State during 2002-03, the existing post-harvest handling and cold storage capacity is inadequate. Assuming 30 percent of the marketable surplus produce to be stored, an additional cold storage capacity for approximately 14 lakh MT is required, which translates into 281 additional cold storage units of 5000 MT capacity each, and a capital investment of Rs.562 crore. At present, 27 districts out of 38 have cold storage facilities, which can take care of only about 5 percent of the total production of fruits and vegetables. Post-harvest handling facilities and cold storage units are required to be established in the remaining 10 districts. Additional facilities may be created in those districts where the number of cold storages and their capacity are inadequate. Rural godowns also have vast potential in the State in view of the fact that the majority of the farmers are small and marginal who command little holding capacity. The State Government may identify potential areas and draw up a plan for the construction of specialized storage facilities for fruits like Litchi, Mango, Banana, etc., and their processed products. This is possible only if an uninterrupted power supply to the Cold Storage units is ensured by the Bihar State Electricity Board.
C. Agricultural Marketing
Bihar’s agricultural sector has shown impressive growth compared to other progressive states. However, income growth has not been commensurate with this trend and the challenges ahead are (i) ensuring that more value is added to production and (ii) that some of the extra value is channeled to farmers. Currently, value tends to be added outside the state, and there is a general lack of marketing mechanisms to respond to farmers’ needs. Marketing is crucial for a successful diversification and commercialization of Bihar agriculture and accelerated farmer income growth. Further income generation from Bihar’s agriculture and food sector will require addressing product quality, delivery, and pricing, despite some technical, institutional, and organizational barriers.

A very small share of local production finds its way to the regulated markets in Bihar. Just as for other Indian states, Bihar has 95 regulated markets (mandis), 67 principal market yards, and 855 rural haats that handle some of the marketing of major agricultural commodities in the state. They are supervised and controlled by the State Agriculture Produce Marketing Board under the provisions of the Bihar State Agriculture Produce Marketing Act (1960). Data on market arrivals indicate that a very small share of agricultural production finds its way to the markets. This is because (a) the amount and quality of market infrastructure and support services is poor, and (b) the transportation costs and informal transaction costs discourage farmers from going to the markets.

A recent study shows that the quality and quantity of marketing outlets in Bihar are among the worst in the country. Furthermore, a World Bank analysis of some commodity supply chains has shown that up to 40 percent of the margins along with value chains are lost to wastage and transportation costs. Crop diversification, especially into the relatively more perishable fruits and vegetables, will increase the need for effective marketing linkages supported by modern marketing practices, including the introduction of grading, post-harvest management, cold chains, etc.

Standard quality grades for fruits and vegetables are currently not used in Bihar. Few standards are used for milk, fat content, and some other products. Some processing plants are HACCP and ISO certified. The Patna (Bihar) laboratory of the Directorate of Marketing and Inspection (responsible for quality certification of agricultural products under the “AgMark” scheme) ceased its operations at the end of 2006 due to the lack of demand for its services. The Directorate (under the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, Government of India) has 23 Agmark laboratories that processors can approach for voluntary certification of quality and the right to display the AgMark Stamp. Of the 13,000 grading units that exist in the country, only 3 are situated in Bihar. The total value of produce that gets graded is negligible, unlike in Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, and Tamil Nadu, where the share of the value of graded produce is as high as 75 percent of the national value.

There are significant post-harvest losses. Every year, substantial losses are incurred amongst perishable products. It is estimated that as much as 39 percent of tomatoes produced in the State is wasted. Similarly, 39 percent of mangoes and 22 percent of litchis production are lost annually due to a lack of proper post-harvest activities and facilities (World Bank, 2004).

It is recognized that a considerable share of agriculture production in Bihar is being produced for home consumption, thus lowering the marketable surplus. There are also some other important factors that prohibit producers from accessing the markets. One of the most important issues in this respect is the non-remunerative price structure. As discussed elsewhere in this report, the cost of production of various crops is much higher than the Minimum Support Price offered. Added to that is the weak marketing infrastructure. In a recent World Bank study (2004), Bihar ranked third from bottom amongst states in the level and quality of its regulated marketing infrastructure. It also came fourth to the last in the level of farmers’ satisfaction with existing market conditions. Bihar’s density of markets (per million hectares of sown area) is relatively low. There are 7 principal regulated markets for every million ha of area in Bihar compared to 22 in the neighboring state of Andhra Pradesh.

It is encouraging to note that the Bihar Eleventh Plan recognizes the role of private investment to help in the development of marketing infrastructure. This will help promote contract farming, export of fresh and processed fruits, processing of ethanol, corn oil, in the feed and starch industry, export of baby corn, and to make litchi honey.

Finally, the number of wholesale markets in the state is also not adequate, and for the disposal of agricultural produces, the farmers are required to travel a long distance. Nearly 400 sq. km area in the state is served by each wholesale market as against 156 sq. km in Punjab and 318 sq. km in West Bengal. As many of the small and marginal farmers cannot cover such a long distance, they usually dispose of their produces to the village itinerary traders. To conclude, the Infrastructure Development Index is 80 for Bihar, benchmarked against 100 for all India.

ORGANIC AGRICULTURE
Increasing awareness about the health hazards caused by excessive use of agro-chemicals has brought a major shift in customer sensibilities and preference towards food quality in developed countries. In India, soil erosion and salinity problems, compounded with the ever-rising cost of cultivation caused by excessive agrochemicals and irrigation, have made cultivators look for alternative strategies. Globally, the demand for safe and healthy food is on the rise. Global consumers are increasingly looking forward to organic food that is considered to be safe and hazard-free. The global market for organic food is expected to touch US $40 billion by 2010. The demand is ever-increasing both in developing as well as developed countries. Worldwide, over 130 countries produce certified organic products in commercial quantities.
Concept of Organic Farming
Organic agriculture is primarily defined as a production system which is supportive of the environment. Organic production systems are based on specific standards precisely formulated for food production and aim at achieving systems that are socially and ecologically sustainable. The use of chemical synthetic fertilizers and pesticides is avoided. The focus in organic agriculture is to provide toxin-free food for the customer and the farmer growing it using organic inputs. Organic agriculture is a process that imparts sustenance and minimizes the ecological footprint.

“Organic” denotes a label for products that have been produced in accordance with certain standards during food production, handling, processing, marketing stages, and certified by a duly constituted certification body or authority. The organic label is therefore a process claim rather than a product claim. Often, customers feel that organic foods are healthier and purer. The label does not mean that. It simply means that the products follow defined standards of production and handling. So an organic standard will not exempt producers and processors from compliance with general regulatory requirements like food safety regulations, pesticide registrations, general food, nutrition labeling rules, etc.

To facilitate trade and avoid misleading terms, the Codex Alimentarius, a joint body of FAO/WHO, framed certain guidelines for the production, processing, labeling, and marketing of organically-produced food. It defines organic agriculture as a holistic food production management system which promotes and enhances agro-system health, including biodiversity, biological cycles, and soil biological activity. The long-term objective of the FAO Organic Agriculture Programme is to enhance food security, rural development, sustainable livelihoods, and environmental integrity by building the capacities of member countries in organic production, processing, certification, and marketing.
Soil Health Management
Soil is a valuable national and natural resource. We depend on it. Soil conservation practices are very useful for Bihar, which is ridden with floods and drought. The prime focus of organic agriculture is the management of soil organic matter to enhance the chemical, physical, and biological properties of soil. The concept of feeding the soils rather than the plants forms the basis of the sustainable approach. One of the basic principles of soil fertility management in an organic system is that plant nutrition depends on ‘biologically derived nutrients’. Instead of using soluble forms of nutrients, less available forms of nutrients in organic matter are used. The nutrients are released by the activities of soil microbes and soil animals. Improved biological activity and diversity are also known to suppress weeds, pests, and diseases.

Keeping soils in place is the beginning of conservation, but they should also function well. Soil organic matter cannot be increased quickly even when management practices that conserve soil organic matter are adopted. The increased addition of organic matter associated with continuous cropping and the production of higher crop yields are accompanied by an increase in the rate of decomposition. Moreover, only a small fraction of crop residues added to soil remains as soil organic matter. After an extended period of time, the return of all crop residues and the use of forages in rotations with cereals and oilseeds may significantly increase soil organic matter, particularly the “active” fraction.

Organic Matter and Composting Techniques
Forms of Organic Matter Used
The various forms of organic matter used are:
Animal dung
Crop residues
Bio-gas slurry
Green manures
Bio-solids from agro-industries, food industries, and allied industries
Animal dung is also used competitively for fuel purposes. Composting techniques like vermi-composting, phospho-composting, and N-enriched phospho-composting are used to improve the nutrient-quality potential of composts. Vermi-composting is the easiest form of composting, which can be initiated on the farmer’s field by training and demonstration. The seed bank for earthworms can be set up by the soil testing labs, and every gram panchayat can distribute the worms at subsidized costs for preparing vermin-beds on-farm.
Decomposition of Organic Material
The decomposition of organic material involves both physical and chemical processes:
Physical Decomposition: Results from the activities and appetites of various invertebrates such as mites, millipedes, beetles, sowbugs, earwigs, earthworms, slugs, and snails.
Chemical Decomposition: Results predominately from soil microorganisms, including bacteria, actinomycetes, fungi, and some protozoans. Under appropriate conditions, complex organic compounds present in food scraps and yard trimmings are enzymatically degraded into smaller compounds, carbon dioxide, and water. Heat is also generated as a by-product of this oxidative process. Composting continues as long as appropriate microorganisms are present and adequate environmental conditions are maintained. Once the decay process is completed, the non-degradable organic matter becomes the characteristic humus-like material called compost. Various compost inoculants are available which, after creating amenable conditions for composting [C
ratio of substrate, moisture, aeration], can bring down the time required for composting.
Functions of Soil Organic Matter
Nutrient Cycling
Increases the nutrient holding capacity of soil (CEC).
Is a pool of nutrients for plants.
Chelates (binds) nutrients, preventing them from becoming permanently unavailable to plants.
Provides food for soil organisms from bacteria to worms. These organisms hold on to nutrients and release them in forms available to plants.
Water Dynamics
Improves water infiltration.
Decreases evaporation.
Increases water holding capacity, especially in sandy soils.
Structure
Reduces crusting, especially in fine-textured soils.
Encourages root development.
Improves aggregation, preventing erosion.
Prevents compaction.
Other Effects of Soil Organic Matter
Pesticides break down more quickly and can be “tied-up” by organic matter (and clays).
Agricultural Waste and Its Potential
According to a conservative estimate, around 600 to 700 million tons per annum of agricultural wastes are available in our country, but most of it is not used properly. Such a rich source of fixed carbon can be converted into wealth by mobilizing the bio-mass to feed the soil. About 1800 million tons of animal dung is produced annually in our country. Even if two-thirds of it is used for bio-gas generation, it is expected to yield a bio-gas of not less than 120 mm³ per day and manure of 440 million tons per year, which is equivalent to 2.9 mt of N, 2.75 mt of P₂O₅, and 1.89 mt of K₂O. As far as possible, organic farming systems are closed-loop cycles with respect to nutrient balance. Only nutrients exported are in the form of food for human and animal consumption. Crop burning is avoided. Unscientific storage and loss of nutrients are also avoided. Thus, organic agriculture is considered to conserve the micro-ecosystem and is more sustainable than conventional agriculture.
Soil Health and Cost Reduction
Reducing the cost of cultivation is key for profitability. Farmers today are concerned with many aspects beyond production. They need safe inputs that provide relief from using toxic chemicals without compromising productivity. Earlier practices of clean cultivation aimed at preventing the growth of all types of life forms near plant surfaces, leading to unbalanced systems that increase the chances of pathogen colonization at alarming rates due to less or no competition from native flora. Such systems require extremely high quantities of inputs, leading farmers into a vicious cycle of persistent chemical input use, which increases production costs.
Organic Systems and Safe Inputs
Organic systems primarily aim at safe inputs at lower costs. Certain Do-it-Your-Own technologies, like preparing active microbial cultures on-farm, are used worldwide. These technologies are categorized under aerobic or anaerobic brewing. Effective Microorganisms, also known as “EM technology,” is a method to improve soil quality and plant growth using a mixture of microorganisms consisting mainly of lactic acid bacteria, purple bacteria, and yeasts that coexist for the benefit of the environment they are introduced into. Using inoculums concentrate, farmers can prepare EM solutions on-field at a minimal cost.
Aerobic Extraction of Microbes
Lately, aerobic extraction of microbes from composts is being tried worldwide. Compost teas, as they are called, show positive effects on foliar and soil applications. They increase the biodiversity of microbes, in addition to supplying useful soluble metabolites from composts. Another Indian technology, KREF Solution, is used by Indian farmers to aerobically brew and extract essential nutrients from vermin-compost enriched with useful nitrogen-fixing and phosphate-solubilizing microbes. KREF Biomanure contains total fermentation solids and soluble bacteria and fungi extracted from natural organic manure. These units can be set up in each village by a rural entrepreneur financed by cooperatives or banks.
Brewing and Application of KREF Solution
A specialized user-friendly brewing vessel is used to aerobically brew the microbes extracted from vermicompost and added specially using polymeric carbon sources. Such microbes are allowed to grow for 24 hours aerobically, and the resulting KREF solution is used at 20 liters per acre as foliar and soil application. Since the farmer brews it on his field, the costs are low and economical. The beneficial effects of such KREF solutions have been tested over 10,000 acres since 2005. On-farm brewing of microbes is economical. KREF is boosting the organic movement and grassroots level entrepreneurship.
Dynamic Blend of Microbes in KREF
The dynamic blend of microbes in KREF plays a key role during the process by extracting the locked-up nutrients from KREF Compost through their enzymatic characteristics. Naturally occurring fungi in the compost, such as Aspergillus, Paecilomyes, Penicillium, Chaetomium, Verticillium, and Trichoderma, secrete cellulases that decompose cellulosic residues into simpler carbohydrates. Aspergillus, Penicillium, and Chaetomium can also split hemicelluloses. Amylases, which decompose starch, are secreted by almost all KREF manure microbes. Key amylase producers include Aspergillus and Bacillus, which grow profusely and exhibit attributes like solubilization of insoluble phosphate and nucleic acids degradation. The enzymatic abilities of these organisms enable them to utilize carbon sources efficiently, bringing nutrients into the food or nutrient cycle for utilization by other microbes. The fermentation cycle results in the thorough extraction of nutrients and microbes from the compost. KREF Biomanure microbes, being highly competitive, enrich the end product (brew) in terms of nutrients and microbes. The fungi showing antagonistic abilities, such as Trichoderma, Aspergillus, and Chaetomium, secrete chitinases that restrict the growth of unwanted fungi. The yeast Saccharomyces grows competitively during aeration at all levels of dissolved oxygen, helping to keep anaerobic bacteria growth in check after preparation during storage. The process cycle of 24 hours enables the extraction of a diverse range of microbes, including actinomycetes, fungi, bacteria, and protozoa, from the KREF Compost.
Post-Fermentation Use for Soil and Foliar Application
After reaching soil or leaves, microbes function in the following ways:
Aid in Nutrient Cycling: Microbes are responsible for setting the wheels of the organic food chain rolling. Their secretive, enzymatic abilities canalize the available food into the food web, creating a buffer for absorbing stress and coordinating the nutritional requirements of crops and the whole ecosystem.
Aid in Correcting Imbalanced or Chemical-Affected Soils: In combination with organic amendments and procedural methods.
Minimize the Use of Fungicides: The diversity of microbes helps in reducing the use of fungicides due to competition from freshly brewed active microbes for food and space on plant surfaces.
Enable Addition of Fresh Microbes: KREF solution also enables the addition of fresh microbes at the rate of 20 liters per acre of fresh culture, which teems with healthy microbes. They start working instantaneously in soils and on leaves, allowing farmers to see results within 48 to 72 hours.
Microbes and Organic Farming
There are millions of microbes in a gram of soil, significant due to their prolific activities. Microbes literally control the process of organic farming as they govern nutrient cycling reactions in soils. They process organic matter to provide a balance of minerals and nutrients, which are utilized by plants for healthy, vigorous crop growth. Microbes also form a protective cover for plants and provide balance by preventing any one organism from dominating. They are basic indicators of soil fertility and are responsible for nutrient cycles.
Demand for Microbial Inputs
Research identifies additional roles for microorganisms in soil. Commercially cultured microorganisms for use as agricultural inoculants have been available for more than 100 years and have significantly impacted agriculture. Organisms used as inoculants in soils typically include:
Nitrogen-fixing Bacteria: Including Rhizobium and Azotobacter.
Phosphate-solubilizing Bacteria: Such as Bacillus, Aspergillus, and Penicillium.
Mycorrhizal Fungi: For improving nutrient uptake and promoting plant growth.

CREDIT FACILITIES
Credit is a critical input for the development of agriculture and allied activities. The key task is to ensure a convergence among credit availability, an effective credit delivery system in keeping with the adequate credit absorptive capacity of the farmer. Mere availability of credit does not ensure its productive use and increased production/value addition. This is more important in the case of small/marginal farmers who are quite often left out because of the clout of influential farmers.
Though over the years there has been a significant improvement in the availability of institutional credit in the agriculture sector in the state, it is still considered to be inadequate and inefficient. As a result, farmers in Bihar are still heavily dependent on informal sources of credit at exorbitantly high rates of interest. The state of Bihar, which has a per capita income of Rs. 5,772 vis-à-vis a national per capita income of Rs. 23,222, is the poorest state in India. Out of the total branches of banks, 65% of the branches are in rural areas. Bank-wise rural branches are: Commercial Banks 59.6%, RRBs 86.5%, and Co-op Banks 17.66% of the total. There is a gross inadequate density of financial service access points in Bihar. Bihar has a total of 45,103 villages; this translates to one branch in every 13 villages based on the total branch estimates of 2006. This indicates that even to provide basic access to financial services, this is clearly insufficient. (Annexure-XXXIII)
Challenges in Banking Services
In addition to the low density of branch presence, there is the added issue of the nature of services provided by the banking system as a whole. The extreme poverty level of the state is reflected in the aggregate deposit base. The average deposit per individual is only Rs. 55,000 against the national average of Rs. 1,95,000. The situation of advances is even worse for Regional Rural Banks and Cooperative Banks where the total amount of advances for the year 2005-06 is only Rs. 22,250 and Rs. 5,950 respectively. However, this trend is moving in a positive direction over the years. The Credit Deposit ratio in the state is also very poor compared to the national average. In the case of Commercial Banks and Regional Rural Banks, the CD Ratio in Bihar is 31 and 36 respectively. The performance of Primary Agricultural Credit Societies (PACS) also reflects a similar state. While there are almost 6,000 PACS in Bihar, only 19% of them posted a profit in the year 2004-05 compared to the national average of 43%.
Kisan Credit Card (KCC)
Kisan Credit Card (KCC) is another important medium for increasing agricultural credit. At present, there are 1.04 crore landholdings in the State, but till 2005-06, only 14.5 lakh KCCs have been distributed against the target of 30.5 lakhs. To meet the target of crop loans of Rs. 10,042 crore in 2006-07, KCCs have to play a very important role. Although total disbursement under KCC has increased almost 2.5 times, from Rs. 342 crore in 2002-03 to Rs. 815 crore in 2005-06, it still channels only a minuscule proportion of the total credit volume for crop loans.
Micro-Finance Initiatives
In the area of micro-finance, more than 17,000 Self-Help Groups had been financed by banks up to 2005 through their priority lending schemes in 38 districts. The target for 2006-07 is to raise the number to 24,000 SHGs and advance Rs. 48 crore through the scheme. As of March 31, 2007, a cumulative number of 72,638 SHGs were credit-linked to banks, and the total credit flow to these SHGs worked out to Rs. 202.98 crore.
Institutional Credit Flow
The flow of credit for agriculture in the state from institutional sources from 2003-04 till 2005-06 (Annexure XXXIV) shows that total institutional credit in the agricultural sector in the state recorded an increase of almost 82% over the period. The main reasons for the improvement in agricultural credit disbursement in Bihar since 2003-04 may be attributed to the following developments:
Kisan Credit Card Package: Effective instrument for Commercial Banks and the RRBs to enter the crop loans segment.
Million Shallow Tubewells Programme (MSTP): A convenient platform for the CBs and the RRBs for increasing investment credit.
Growing Agriculture Sector: Since the late 1990s supported financing for Farm Mechanization in Bihar.
Gap in Credit Availability
Despite this improvement in absolute terms, the availability of credit is far short of requirements. As mentioned in the Economic Survey (2006-07) by the Government of Bihar, the agricultural credit need was estimated to be Rs. 11,341.22 crore for Bihar in 2006-07. However, the credit target for agriculture set by banks for 2006-07 was only Rs 3,732 crore, which was much lower than the requirement. This gap between the target and actual disbursement of agricultural credit needs to be narrowed down, so that agriculture does not suffer for want of credit, ceteris paribus, and no such unfortunate events like farmers’ suicides and other miseries may take place.
Access to Institutional Credit
Some 83 percent of Bihar farmers operating around 41 percent of the land own less than 1 ha. each. Even at the all-India level, the share of institutional credit during 2002 was only 61 percent. Various surveys show that a majority of marginal farmers have no access to institutional credit and have to depend primarily on non-institutional sources.
Source: Sukhpal Singh & M.S Toor, Indian Journal of Agricultural Economics, Conference Number – Volume 60, No.3.
Minikit Programme for Marginal Farmers
Appreciating this problem, the Report of Dr. Sen Committee on Agriculture Production in Eastern India 1987 made a specific recommendation for a ‘minikit’ programme for marginal and small farmers for the Eastern region. The idea is that small/marginal farmers are given a small kit which contains the required quantity of seed, fertilizer, and even pesticide for a specific farm size along with instructions for use in the local language. The programme was taken up earnestly by West Bengal for summer rice during the late eighties and early nineties with very successful results. Under present Bihar conditions, the introduction of this programme both for rice and wheat is recommended.
Commercial Cultivation of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants
Commercial cultivation of medicinal and aromatic plants is already in vogue in the state of Bihar. Some of the important species include Periwinkle (Catharanthus), Gloriosa, Coleus, Phyllanthus, Aswagandha, Annona, Citronella, Palmarosa, and Geranium. A majority of these crops are being exported in bulk form. During the X Plan, medicinal and aromatic plants received focus with the setting up of the National Medicinal Plant Board and constituent State Medicinal Plant Boards.
Mushroom Cultivation
Mushroom cultivation in Bihar is not very popular as yet. There are, however, scattered examples of individual entrepreneurs having achieved success, and others are following them in and around Patna. Because of its profitability, particularly for landless and small marginal households, there is an urgent need to encourage its cultivation and marketing on commercial lines.
Silk Production
India produces a variety of silks called mulberry, ‘tassar’, ‘muga’, and ‘eri’ based on the feeding habit of the cocoons. Bihar is known for ‘tassar’ silk produced in the Bhagalpur area. This district offers great potential for silk development intervention through DIPP/VSE schemes which could provide the needed help. Since Bihar is more or less a new entrant, it should adopt the latest technology so as to be the leader in silk production. The producers will need technological, marketing, and credit support.
Replication of Successful Farm Practices
Hisar Experiment – Wheat Technology
During 2005-06, as much as 203 thousand hectares of land in Hisar district was brought under wheat cultivation. A total of 7.52 lakh metric tonnes of wheat at the rate of 37.04 quintals per hectare was produced. The challenge, therefore, was to increase wheat production so that the farmer rediscovers agriculture as a remunerative occupation and then continues to contribute to the central food pool. Scientists involved with the project pointed out that during the successive years wheat sowing was getting delayed due to a number of factors, resulting in the wheat grains getting affected by the rise in the day temperature when they were just about maturing. As a result, the grains remained shriveled and weak, and even when it appeared that the crop was satisfactory, the end result fell much too short of expectations.
 9. Disaster Risk Insurance: Some International Experiences
The world over, the concept of risk hedging frameworks has gained importance in the recent past. The examples for regions where the risk of natural disaster is calculated and hedged to a fair degree are in countries like Peru and Vietnam. The model developed for these geographies has been successful in using insurance as an effective risk hedging mechanism.
One interesting example is the Vietnam experience. Northern parts of Peru as well as the Mekong delta are flooded due to the effects of El Niño. Credit provisions are the most vulnerable in this situation due to increased default rates and higher liquidity risk (Skees and Barnett 2006).
To reduce the risk of default due to natural hazards, an index-based flood insurance product was developed and piloted in Vietnam by the national government in collaboration with the World Bank. The following are important examples across the globe where index-based risk transfer mechanisms have been implemented in severely disaster-prone geographies:
(i) Vietnam: Early flooding in the Mekong Delta that is brought on by heavy rains upstream. In Vietnam, past practices of debt forgiveness following natural disasters have become unsustainable and recent changes to banking regulations are likely to lead to responses more similar to those in Bihar. The use of correlations between variables like natural phenomena and cultural helped in the development of the index (Barnett and Mahul 2007).
The target population is the agri-lenders and the contract payment structure involves a linear payment rate based on levels of water exceeding 250 cm at the prime river station (Tan Chau) with backup measures from stations upstream.
(ii) Peru: Catastrophic flooding in the northern regions brought on by El Niño. In Peru, severe credit rationing has emerged as a mechanism banks employ to limit their financial exposure to correlated risk. The target group is the government and the entry of a reinsurer has spelled the lowering of risk on part of the insurer. The model uses the ENSO data and correlates the losses for agricultural produce. The government acts as the medium for risk transfer and relief distribution.
(iii) Mongolia: Catastrophic Risk Insurance against severe winter (Dzud). An index-based livestock insurance scheme that has hedged the risk of rural people against the loss of livestock in times of extreme weather events like Dzud. This approach uses mortality rates based on species and geographical areas.
MAJOR ISSUES RELATED TO AGRICULTURE SECTOR
Agriculture is the core competence of the state. However, agriculture has performed badly, declining in the early 1990s by 2% per annum and growing by less than 1% per annum since 1994-95. Crop productivity trends have been below the Indian average for most crops and far below their potential yield, given Bihar’s fertile land and abundant water resources.
The critical production constraint to the rice-wheat production system in Bihar is the delay in seedling raising and transplanting of rice, and late sowing of wheat due to dependence on rice nursery raising and transplanting on rainwater or canal water (wherever available), and inadequate conjunctive use of groundwater, canal water, and rainwater. Even when a farmer owns a tube-well, he is reluctant to pump groundwater for nursery raising and transplanting of rice because of the excessive cost of pumping associated with the diesel engine operated pumping sets. Major production constraints are:
Low Seed Replacement Rate
Seeds of high-yielding varieties have been critical in increasing crop production. The dwarfing gene of rice and wheat did wonders in the 60s as these varieties were short stature and could respond well to fertilizer, irrigation, and other management practices. Development of hybrid varieties in many crops opened yet another opportunity to further increase crop production and productivity. Due to lack of assured supply of quality seed, crop productivity has suffered in the State.
Low Level of Fertilizer Use
Fertilizers are the critical input in modern agriculture. The present level of fertilizer application is not only inadequate but also far from its balanced use. The present level of fertilizer application in the State is 98 kg/ha, whereas it is more than 175 kg/ha in Punjab and higher applications in other States.
Lack of Mechanization
In Punjab, there are 68 tractors per 1000 ha, whereas it is only 17 per 1000 ha in Bihar. Lack of proper and adequate mechanization hinders timely completion of agronomic operations. Therefore, it is important to promote farm mechanization from the point of view of better and timely land preparation and cultivation practices.
Low Level of Credit Availability
Modern agriculture is capital-intensive. Lack of institutional credit hinders the process of technology adoption. There are 104 lakh farm holdings, whereas the number of Kisan Credit Cards is only 20 lakh, which is very low. A large number of farmers in Bihar are isolated from institutional credit sources. Even if some sources are available, the amount is inadequate and availability is not timely. This constrains farmers' adoption of technological practices.
Small & Fragmented Holdings
Land holdings in Bihar are predominantly marginal farms with a high level of fragmentation. Of all the holdings, more than 90 percent are small and marginal farmers. Tiny and fragmented holdings play a deterrent to the adoption of modern technology. This affects the economy of scale as well as the adoption of improved farm practices.
Diesel-Based Irrigation which Increases the Cost of Production
Irrigation is mostly dependent on diesel-operated tube wells. The high operational cost of diesel engine pump sets forces the farmers to practice deficit irrigation of cereal crops. As a result, the yields of all crops are much lower than their potential yields.
Lack of Effective System for Transfer of Technology
The extension system as it exists now is very weak both structurally and in its capacity to absorb and disseminate modern technology. Since independence, many extension systems have been tried but most of them have been unsustainable over the long run. A rationalization of the system is therefore required. Another major lacuna has been the inadequacy of research-supported extension systems. The Agriculture University in Bihar has failed to develop and promote research which could support farm extension services.
Risk Arising out of Flood & Drought
Agriculture in the State is prone to natural calamities. Whereas the North Bihar districts are affected by recurrent floods, the South Bihar districts are prone to lack of rainfall. Almost 41 percent of the geographical area of the State is flood-prone. On the other hand, 40 percent of the geographical area of South Bihar is drought-prone. This affects improved and modern farm practices and accelerated technology adoption leading to lower levels of farm productivity and farmers' income.
Rural Power Supply
Power generation and availability rates are the lowest in Bihar in the country. Compared to an all-India average annual electricity consumption level of 334 kWh and 895 kWh of Punjab, the average per capita consumption of electricity in Bihar was only 55 kWh. All efforts are being made to help improve the power supply to rural Bihar.
Land Records, Tenancy, and Reforms
The entire process of tenancy reforms in Bihar has been derailed, with consequent impacts on agricultural stagnation and farmers’ misery in terms of acute poverty. The process of obtaining records of ownership rights of land is cumbersome and is reported to involve very high transaction costs. Unrecorded oral tenancy is prevalent with very weak tenant security. Tenancy in Bihar overwhelmingly consists of leasing-in by small and marginal farmers. The computerization of land records, protection of tenancy, and fixation of rent are of prime importance for the development of the agriculture sector in Bihar. Attention is now being paid towards these deficiencies.
Rural Infrastructure
Bihar’s agricultural stagnation has been caused by poor rural infrastructure connectivity. The total surface length of roads per lakh of population is only 43.89 km as opposed to the national average of 151.27 km (1999-2000). Although 32 percent of the villages in the State are connected by roads, due to lack of maintenance, it is reported that most of the village roads provide only seasonal connectivity. This has been a matter of prime concern to the present government, and attempts are being made to bring drastic improvements in rural infrastructure.
Lack of Procurement
Rice and wheat procurement has largely been limited to a few states of the country. Public procurement in Bihar has remained very low over the decade, having implications for farmers’ misery. The farmers of Bihar have to resort to distress sale in a season of plenty. Farmers are deprived of a remunerative price for their produce. Therefore, the farmers of the State need to be assured to get a minimum assured price. Adequate procurement centers need to be opened. Also, it is imperative that the procurement of maize is made operative, as maize production has gained high momentum. Several districts of Bihar have shown the best performance in increased maize production in recent years.
Inadequate Storage
There is a major inadequacy in storage facilities in Bihar. It is assessed that there is a need for 25 lakh MT storage capacity, whereas the created capacity is only 12 lakh MT. Besides, there is a need for creating proper storage infrastructure at the primary level. Lack of storage capacity leads to huge losses (sometimes to the extent of 50%) leading to erosion in farm income.
Inadequate Processing & Marketing
Climatological and edaphic factors allow for the cultivation of a variety of crops in Bihar. However, farmers get discouraged as they do not get adequate prices for their produce. It is a common understanding that the comparative advantage in production is lost because of inadequate marketing and processing facilities. In Maharashtra, 40% of the produce is used for processing, whereas it is less than 2% in Bihar. This is due to poor marketing infrastructure in the State.

INTEGRATED AGRICULTURAL RISK MANAGEMENT
Need for Integrated Risk Management in Agriculture
Agriculture is the single largest private sector occupation in Bihar and can be considered the riskiest business. The vulnerability to income and consumption shocks makes it imperative to develop formal agricultural insurance mechanisms to cope with such risks. The traditional yield insurance schemes have failed in managing the risks of poor farmers as evident from their historically high payouts and poor penetration rates. Such schemes like the erstwhile Comprehensive Crop Insurance Scheme (CCIS) which finally took the form of the present National Agricultural Insurance Scheme (NAIS) suffer from several deficiencies.
The ‘area approach’ followed is based on the results of crop-cutting experiments where the insured farmer receives indemnity based upon the difference between the threshold yield and the yield of the crop-cutting experiments in their area. Since crop yields vary over a small area, situations exist in which farmers do not get compensated for their loss under the NAIS and farmers without insurable losses would receive payments.
Crop insurance is mandatory for farmers who take crop loans, which dampens innovation. Farmers with adequate risk management capabilities should not be forced to purchase crop insurance in order to receive a loan. Problems are faced especially when the loan is paid up and there is a lack of understanding of the benefits of agricultural insurance which leads to a fall in the demand for insurance.
There are long delays in payment of claims to farmers due to the time-consuming crop-cutting experiments by the agriculture department which causes an erosion of income for farmers.
Physical verification of the losses proved to be very costly and often gave way to fraud as it allows for an opportunity for collusion between the assessor and the client. Hence, moral hazard and adverse selection are inherent in the design. (Annexure XXXV and XXXVI show the performance of the NAIS in Bihar compared to other Indian states and an overview of its cumulative performance).
The Agricultural Insurance Company of India Ltd’s Varsha Bima and Weather-Based Crop Insurance Scheme (WBCIS) aim at overcoming the problems with NAIS or the Rashtriya Krishi Bima Yojana (RKBY) which is mandatory for the loanee farmers. It is voluntary for the non-loanee farmers and reaching out to the non-loanee farmers is a larger challenge, beyond the immediate need for product and process innovations.
In view of these deficiencies and the unsustainable role of the State in subsidizing crop insurance which could crowd out the role of the private sector, index-based weather insurance models could be a more efficient means to deal with risks faced in agriculture.
Nearly 60% of the area under cultivation in Bihar is rain-fed. The co-efficient of variation in annual rainfall during 1980-81 to 2002-03 was 32 percent. The monsoons play a critical role in the sub-continent as it determines whether the harvest will be bountiful, average, or poor in a given year. About 49 percent of the state’s total cropped area is irrigated, as against the national average of 40 percent. Nearly 76 percent of the net irrigated area in Zone-1, 85 percent of the net irrigated area in Zone-2, and 45 percent of the net irrigated area in Zone-3 have tube wells as the source, while canal irrigation accounts for about 14 percent in Zone-1, 13 percent in Zone-2, and 48 percent in Zone-3. Farmers could purchase rainfall contracts and if the rainfall in an area varies from a pre-defined level, varying levels of payment would be compensated to the respective farmers based upon the level of shortfall of rainfall. This alternate approach compared to the NAIS would be effective in reducing moral hazard and transaction costs. Innovations in the form of index-based weather insurance have come up in the past few years to explore possibilities of overcoming some of the deficiencies and are being improved on the basis of the feedback from product pilots.
The three main agro-climatic zones on the basis of soil characterization, rainfall, temperature, and terrain—North West Alluvial Plains (Zone – I), North East Alluvial Plains (Zone – II), South Bihar Alluvial Plains (Zone – III)—have different average precipitation levels and the variations in weather phenomena are wide enough to substantiate the need for relevant interventions in the space of agri-risk management across the three zones.
Managing Production Risks and Price Risks
Given the status of agricultural risk management in the state, there is a need to focus on the critical areas of price risk and production risk management.
Production risks refer to the high variability of production outcomes due to the unpredictable nature of the weather, seasonal fluctuations, and pest infestation, diseases which result in yield loss and revenue loss for the farmer. Insurance can play a pivotal role in covering production risks which would help reduce the vulnerability of the farmers to economic losses. Developing appropriate products based on the needs of a particular geography to manage risks associated with agricultural production is the need of the hour.
Price Risk in Agriculture
Price risk refers to the input and output price volatility to which producers are exposed, as the markets for inputs and outputs in the agricultural sector are subject to instability. The fluctuations in price are largely owed to the seasonal fluctuations in demand, lack of information about market prices, lack of alternative market avenues, inability to hold tradable surpluses until the producer attains a better price, national policy level changes, and volatility in the global market. This volatility in price places producers in a precarious situation as they witness unforeseen losses due to falls in output prices or are faced with increased costs of cultivation due to higher input prices.
Vulnerable Groups
The large vulnerable groups like landless labourers and sharecroppers face a variety of risks which have a bearing on their steady flow of income and their ability to build income-generating assets. The main risks identified for the population dependent on agriculture are:
Price risks
Production risks
Institutional risks
Personal risks
Enterprise risk
Business risks
Bihar is not an exception, and these risks become ever more prominent given the importance of agriculture in the state and the gross linkages to livelihoods and industries.
Price Fluctuations
Prices of agricultural commodities fluctuate widely from year to year:
The co-efficient of variation in the farm harvest prices of paddy was as high as 45.4 percent during 1980-81 to 2002-03. In the case of wheat, it was 44.9 percent, and in maize, it was 38.9 percent.
The coefficients of variation in the yields of rice, wheat, and maize were 23.4, 16.4, and 30.3 percent respectively.
Thus, crop farming in Bihar is not only unprofitable at present but also unstable and risky. About 71 percent of the variations in output were explained by variations in rainfall, irrigation, and farm harvest prices. Since variability in rainfall and farm harvest prices is high, the production process is quite risky. Along with low profitability, erratic rainfall and fluctuating market prices act as disincentives for farmers to invest in modernization of agriculture.
Informal Risk Management
In the absence of availability and access to formal risk management mechanisms in a rural environment, the asset-poor households seek to manage risks through various informal strategies (diversify their crops, store grain, engage in informal savings and credit, favor traditional techniques over modern technology, and enter into share-cropping arrangements). Informal risk management provides only partial coverage in case of systemic losses, leaving poor producers vulnerable to extreme poverty, malnutrition, and also dampens long-term agricultural growth.
There also seems to be a trade-off between market-based risk management solutions and public or State-sponsored schemes. A more formalized management of production risk in agriculture necessitates a risk-pooling mechanism like insurance, whereas in price risk management, it is done by accessing commodity derivative markets.
Natural Hazards in Bihar
Given that more than 80% of Bihar’s population is dependent on agriculture and related activities and Bihar happens to be one of the most disaster-prone states in India, the role of risk financing in the context of hedging agricultural risk from climatic shocks becomes critical. It is imperative to develop sophisticated ways of market and government mechanisms for risk transfer. Pre-disaster initiatives (ex ante) need to be given more impetus than post-disaster (ex post) events. These initiatives aim to provide hitherto unforeseen resilience to the rural communities and also bring out transparency and efficiency to the whole effort.
Disaster Profile and Risk Transfer
The disaster profile of the state further compounds the situation. While the northern parts experience frequent floods, southern parts are affected by drought. The possibility of floods and the resultant statewide construction of flood control mechanisms like embankments have been the mandate of successive administrations. However, these mechanisms have had mostly post-disaster safeguards, and while the need for a pre-disaster (ex ante) approach has been long felt, little has been done in this regard. In the recent past, within the space of disaster safeguards, there is a valuable shift in focus from only ex post to also include ex ante frameworks.
Risk Transfer for Natural Disasters – Administration’s Mandate
Ushering in a paradigm shift, the Government of India has invested in disaster mitigation and preparedness strategies like Early Warning Systems. However, public financing is not always sufficient for relief measures:
The assistance amount demanded by states during the period 1995-98 was around Rs. 24,000 Crores, while the total corpus was barely Rs. 700 Crores.
Similarly, during 1998-2002, the states sought assistance of Rs. 60,000 crores, while the amount released through NFCR and NCCF was just Rs. 9,000 Crores.
In addition to a relief, rehabilitation, and reconstruction strategy, inclusion of risk transfer mechanisms could build substantial efficiency into the disaster management strategy for severe, low-probability events. We expect the risk transfer mechanisms to bring in the following efficiencies:
Improvement in response time to disaster relief payouts
Efficient ex-ante (pre-disaster) financing complementing the corpus fund drawn from public finances
Efficient and greater transparency in targeting of relief for people affected by calamities like floods or droughts
Such a product delivery would require technical demonstration of the feasibility of quantifying flood risk, through geophysical and statistical modeling. Mapping using geo-information technology and remote sensing is essential for the development of natural hazard risk insurance and also helps demonstrate how this risk can be transferred through insurance. Also, identification of the Below Poverty Line communities and their exposure to the risk would help in developing a transparent pre-defined index-based risk management product.
Operational Aspects of Risk Transfer
The risk transfer design could also include operational aspects of relief and rehabilitation. For example, the flood risk hedging could be designed such that flood relief and rehabilitation operations would be carried out by Village Disaster Preparedness Committees (VDPCs) who are closer to the community.
This infrastructure has multiple utilities:
The mapping and targeting activities, if done in an effective manner, would help in timely delivery of relief, ensuring efficient targeting.
Rehabilitation activities could be done more effectively through this operational design of the risk transfer.
Also, the availability of the risk transfer mechanisms would help in proper infrastructure and reconstruction for disaster-affected geographies. For example, an earthquake causes huge losses to property supporting economies dependent on agriculture, livestock, or fishery. The higher the losses, the concomitant payouts are higher. So, the insurers have an incentive to spend more on investing in building earthquake-resistant structures.
Challenges and Justifications
Although traditional insurance mechanisms are in place throughout the country, some risks are too large to be easily mitigated or self-insured at the farm/household level. When insurance services are available to transfer such non-diversifiable risks, farmers are able to avoid other more costly risk management strategies and have resources available to recover should the insured event occur without the need to liquidate productive resources for consumption smoothing.
Designing and implementing a risk transfer mechanism for individuals for ‘extreme weather’ events would involve operational challenges in the nature of huge transaction and administration costs for settlement of claims. Also, considering the lower probability of such events, individual households may ignore the need for hedging for such low-probability events. In contrast, delivering to aggregators substantially cuts down on the transaction cost.
The above are some of the reasons which justify the aggregation of systemic ‘extreme weather’ risk cover at the state level. As a pilot, this aggregation could be done at the Local Government level.
Inferences for Agricultural Risk Initiatives
With adequate provision of well-designed production and price risk management products and systems, the existing gaps can be reduced, and higher sustainability can be induced consequent upon the following facts:
The rice-wheat cropping system occupies more than 70% of the gross cropped area, but productivity has remained low despite favorable soil, water, and climatic conditions.
This decline in productivity is basically due to the replacement of upland rice by higher income-generating crops like pulses, oilseeds, and maize.
Wheat production in the state suffers from problems such as delayed sowing, increased cost of production due to the rise in cost of petroleum oil, lack of small-duration varieties that can be appropriately tailored into the rice-wheat system, and aberrations in weather conditions.
The yield per hectare of maize and pulses is higher than the all-India average. Maize production is also very good, and Bihar is one of the leading states in maize production. Maize has multiple uses (e.g., baby corn, sweet corn, popcorn, and green corn) and is commercially very profitable. It is now replacing upland rice in the Kharif season and wheat in the Rabi season.
The sugar industry is the largest agro-based industry in Bihar. It generates considerable employment in the farm sector directly and through ancillary industries and related activities. According to estimates of 2006-07, the area under sugarcane cultivation is 117.2 thousand hectares, production accounts for 5338.8 thousand tons, and productivity is 45552 kg/ha against the national average of 70469 kg/ha. Bihar has the lowest sugar recovery rate in the country at 9% against the national average of 10.36%.
The potential of commercial horticulture and apiculture is also huge.
Additional Avenues to Insure Farm Incomes:
As identified in the background document, given the role of livestock and fisheries as a potential livelihood-transforming avenue, there is an urgent need to develop innovative productivity and life insurance covers in these sectors.
Given the huge gaps in credit requirements and actual disbursements, an effort is needed to deliver the developed insurance products through the channels of Self-Help Groups (SHGs), Farmer Clubs (FCs), ATMAs, extension systems, and other distribution channels in the rural markets of the state.
Even if there is potential for raising the yield level in Bihar, low productivity and low profitability would stand in the way of realizing such potential. Unless paddy and wheat cultivation in Bihar is made profitable, farmers may not be induced to invest in land improvement measures for productivity growth, and the much-desired acreage shift towards paddy and wheat in Bihar at the expense of area loss in Punjab and Haryana may not be forthcoming. Even maize does not seem to be a very promising crop in this regard. With around 90 percent of small/marginal farmers, the marketable surplus is not expected to be very high. All the same, market arrival of rice and wheat is of the order of 20-25 percent. But the quantity procured is rather negligible. This serves as one of the biggest disincentives for higher production of major commodities in the state.
Since the plan envisages a much higher level of production, there is a need for improvement in the marketing system, density of markets, connectivity of the markets within the producing areas, dissemination of market intelligence, and institutional arrangement for procurement of the produce which comes to the market. Adding insurance and risk management to this strategy indeed becomes a win-win for the development of agriculture and for sustaining the livelihoods of the farmers of Bihar.
CHAPTER-10
DEVELOPMENTAL STRATEGIES, POLICIES & INSTITUTIONAL DIRECTIONS
201. Given the low average yields of most commodities, the huge gaps between the demonstrated and generally realized yields, the low farmers’ income, and widespread rural poverty on one hand, and the richness of the natural resources and the socio-political expediency to liberate the people of Bihar from the poverty and hunger trap on the other hand, a focused strategy and policy direction needs to be adopted on a priority basis. A holistic system-based approach, is therefore, needed to simultaneously enhance productivity, profitability, equity, and environmental sustainability through synergistically integrating crop, horticulture, livestock, fisheries, agroforestry, watershed-based soil and water management, social capital formation, agro-processing, and marketing infrastructure.
202. The core of the new strategy would be to address problems crop-wise and area-wise. The focus in the proposed strategy would be primarily two-fold: (i) how Bihar can emerge as the granary of India, and (ii) how Bihar can become a major hub for both national and international markets for horticultural products and fisheries. It is also realized that, in light of geophysical characteristics, there should be a distinct development strategy for flood-prone and drought-prone areas of Bihar.
Following basic strategies and policy directions are proposed for agriculture and allied sectors.
A. Strategy for Crop Husbandry
Adoption of Crop-wise Strategy
203. In order to emerge as the ‘Granary’ of India, to provide balanced nutrition to the rising population, and to generate sufficient surplus for agro-based industries, a food grain production growth rate of 5-6% has to be attained in the next 10 years. The present level of food grain production of 119 lakh MT will increase to 195 lakh MT by the year 2015. Major part of the increase in food grain production will come from maize, rice, and pulses. Rice, pulses, and maize being the thrust crops, area-specific and crop-specific strategies will be adopted. Crop-wise strategies as proposed are as follows:
Strategy for Rice:
204. The state has about 3.2 million ha under rice cultivation, which is mostly rainfed, covering both uplands and shallow lowland ecosystems. The area has decreased from 3.66 to 3.22 million ha during the last six years. The state average productivity is about 1 tonne/ha. The State’s average per hectare productivity potential is in the range of 5-6 tonnes. The major constraints in production are flash floods and submergence, drought in uplands, zinc deficiency, and bacterial blight. Appropriate technological interventions and strategies are:
(i) Cultivation of short-duration and drought-tolerant varieties Vandana, Tulasi, Rajashree.
(ii) Cultivation of varieties like ARRH 2, DRRH 2 in normal situations and Rajendra Mahsuri, Rajendra Sweta, and Swarna in flood-prone and submergence areas.
(iii) Cultivation of bacterial blight-resistant varieties such as Ajaya, IR 64.
(iv) Application of zinc sulphate in zinc-deficient areas.
(v) Propagation of system of rice intensification (SRI) Technology.
(vi) Propagation of hybrid varieties.
(vii) Propagation of Boro rice in the non-rainy season as the productivity is very high due to the absence of disease, pests, and weeds, but it requires committed irrigation. Further, it should also be supported by a strong seed programme and fine/scented variety for raising income.
(viii) Propagation of replacement of long-duration varieties with short and medium-duration varieties.
Strategy for Wheat:
205. Bihar is potentially an important wheat-growing state that contributes 5.7% towards national production from 8% of wheat-growing area of the country with a low productivity of 1.9 tonnes/ha. The yield gap between farmers’ fields and frontline demonstration is about 1.2 tonnes/ha. The area, production, and productivity, averaged over the last five years, are 2.1 million ha, 4 million tonnes, and 1.9 tonnes/ha, respectively. The average per hectare productivity of wheat can be around 4-5 tonnes by adoption of technological means. Bihar possesses high potential for it in light of favorable geo-climatic and soil conditions. The major constraints in production are low seed replacement rates, late sowing, low farm mechanization, and foliar blight disease. Suitable technological interventions are:
(i) Timely sowing and harvesting.
(ii) Development of short and medium duration varieties.
(iii) Site-specific nutrient management.
(iv) Mechanization (Combine Harvesting & Zero Tillage Sowing).
(v) Growing salinity/alkalinity tolerant varieties KRL 19 and KRL 1.78.
(vi) Resource conservation technologies such as zero tillage, FIRBS, and laser land leveling.
(vii) Use of improved varieties like:
Irrigated timely sown: K 0307, HD 2824, HD 2733, HP 1761, PBW443, HUW 468, K9107, NW 1012.
Irrigated late sown: DBW 14, NW 2036, HW 2045, NW 1014, HD 643, HP 1744.
Rainfed timely sown: K 8962, K 8027, MACS 6145, HD 2888.
Strategy for Maize:
206. Maize occupies 6.49 lakh ha with production of 13.60 lakh tonnes and productivity of 2.1 tonnes/ha. Winter maize is popular in Bihar due to its high yield potential, and the area, predominantly under hybrid cultivation, is on the increase. The productivity of winter maize decreased from 3,094 kg/ha in 2004-05 to 2,641 kg/ha in 2005-06. The low productivity is mainly due to non-availability of adequate quantity of seeds of high-yielding hybrids. During Kharif, maize suffers from waterlogging and floods, while in autumn, the crop suffers from moisture stress. In the frontline demonstrations, average productivity of 6 tonnes/ha has been realized, with levels up to 8 tonnes/ha also recorded in farmers’ fields. In view of this, proposed interventions for enhancing productivity are:
(i) Seed production of QPM hybrids within the state.
(ii) Cultivation of QPM hybrids HQPM-1, Shaktiman-1, Shaktiman-2, Shaktiman-3, Shaktiman 4; and normal grain single cross hybrids DHM 115, JH 3851, Prakash, HM 5; and HM 4 for baby corn.
(iii) Winter maize as a better alternative to wheat under rice-wheat system due to rising temperature.
(iv) Intercropping with potato, pea (for green pod), and vegetables in winter maize for additional income of Rs 6,000—12,000 per ha.
(v) Promotion of maize-based processing industry (animal feed, corn oil, starch, ethanol, etc.).
Strategy for Pulses:
207. Bihar can play a major role in meeting India’s shortage of pulses. Its productivity in the state is greater than the All-India average. In the year 2006-07, in Bihar, it was 901 kg/ha while in India it was 473 kg/ha. Following strategies are proposed to further enhance its productivity:
(i) Large rice fallow areas can be brought under Urad, Moong, and other pulses in order to increase farmers’ income.
(ii) Popularization of high-yielding varieties supported by a strong seed programme.
(iii) Rehabilitation of gram in Agro-climatic Zone-I after the harvest of medium and late rice.
(iv) Use of bio-fertilizer including Rhizobium.
(v) Improving farm drainage to mitigate the problem of waterlogging.
Strategy for Rapeseed-Mustard:
208. Cooking oil is one of the major components in the Indian dietary system. Unfortunately, this has been in shortage. Fortunately, Bihar is in a position to supplement this shortage if proper strategy is adopted. Currently, the acreage under rapeseed-mustard in Bihar did not vary much during the last five years. Area, production, and productivity in Bihar presently are 0.82 lakh ha, 0.76 lakh tonnes, and 926 kg/ha, respectively. The major constraints in production are use of traditional varieties, inadequate moisture availability at sowing and late sowing of mustard, particularly in rice-fallow areas, broadcasting method of sowing and use of high seed rate, and pests like aphid, Bihar hairy caterpillar, Alternaria blight, white rust, and downy mildew. These issues could be tackled by suitable interventions. This would include:
(i) Use of improved varieties of Indian mustard:
Early/timely sown: Sej 2, Pusa Mahak, and Pusa Bold.
Late sown: Rajendra Rai Pichheti, Rajendra Anukool, Ashirvad; Toria: RAUTS 17, Panchali; and Yellow Sarson: Rajendra Sarson 1, Ragini, Benoy.
(ii) Moisture conservation strategy and rainwater harvesting to ensure irrigation.
(iii) Plant protection measures for controlling Alternaria blight, Bihar hairy caterpillar, and aphid.
(iv) Production enhancement by apiary boxes in mustard fields.
(v) Beekeeping as a pollinizer and also for additional income.
(vi) Use of filler crops such as guava and custard apple and leguminous vegetables, turmeric, elephant foot yam as intercrop.
(vii) High-density planting (200-225 plants/ha).
Optimum Dates of Nursery Raising & Transplanting of Rice, and Sowing of Wheat and Other Rabi Crops
209. Traditionally, rice was cultivated in high rainfall areas where water was abundantly available. In regions receiving 800 mm to 1200 mm rainfall, short-duration rice was cultivated in midlands and long-duration rice only in lowlands. Even though the farmers did not develop water resources for regular irrigation of the rice crop, they did utilize accumulated runoff water in ponds, lakes, rivulets, or any other local depressions for irrigating the rice fields either for field preparation or to protect the crop from withering during prolonged dry spells. The income associated with the adoption of high-yielding rice cultivars encouraged the farmers to cultivate rice in low to medium rainfall areas having assured irrigation supply. Thus, with the development of water resources for irrigation, rice cultivation spread to medium to low rainfall areas as well. However, high yields of rice could be obtained only by eliminating moisture stress through assured irrigation and better utilization of rainwater.
Efficient Use of Modern Inputs
210. An efficient and optimum use of modern inputs like quality seeds, chemical fertilizers, and other macro and micro-nutrients, is the key to productivity improvement on a sustainable basis. Therefore, farmers should be enabled to access and use modern farm inputs in an optimal and efficient manner. A mini kit programme is recommended for small and marginal farmers to enable them to increase productivity levels through the use of modern quality inputs. Government can take advantage of available funds under Food Security Mission and procure quality HYV seeds for wheat, hybrid rice, and maize for this purpose. The services of progressive farmers may be used to produce quality seeds, and also delivery services for the supply of other inputs should be strengthened. Rural credit is another grey area. Small/marginal farmers are invariably deprived of institutional credit – it is only 29 percent of total agricultural credit. All possible efforts should be made to provide the required inputs directly under the mini kit programme. Linkages with SHG is another successful approach.
Popularization of Multi-Crop Zero-Till Seed Drills
211. The Zero-till Seed Drills, developed at Pantnagar in the 1990s, are being produced by several manufacturers and are getting inducted into rice-based cropping systems for seeding wheat and other winter (Rabi) crops. As the farmers are accustomed to sow wheat in highly pulverized fields, sometimes they prefer the use of zero-till seed drills for seeding wheat after one or two tilling by cultivator or country plough. As the soils of harvested rice fields in eastern India contain high moisture, zero tillage technology for sowing wheat, lentil, and oilseed crops has been found highly useful in timely seeding, reducing the cost of production, and increasing crop yields. The tractor owners, however, discourage the use of this machine in order to increase the operating hours of their tractors and the associated benefit from it. There is a need to enhance the pace of adoption of the multi-crop zero-till seed drill by organizing large-scale demonstrations.

Intensive Training to Farmers about Modern Crop Production Technologies
Scientists from the Department of Agriculture, Krishi Vigyan Kendras, State Agricultural Universities, and ICAR Institutes should be engaged to impart training to farmers in their villages on modern crop production technologies. Retired scientists may also be engaged on this venture. Some specific educational programmes are listed below:
(i) Training to farmers about improved rice production technology including cultivars, seed rate, nursery raising, and plant population at the time of transplanting, field preparation, and balanced use of fertilizers, optimum water regime, and weed and pest management.
(ii) Training to farmers about improved wheat, maize, pulses, oilseeds, and other Rabi crop production technologies including cultivars, and nutrient, weed, water, and pest management.
(iii) Training and demonstration about seed production technologies of different crops.
(iv) Educating farmers about the use of low energy water application (LEWA) and other pressurized irrigation equipment.
(v) Educating farmers about the use of zero till seed drills, planters, reapers, and threshers.
(vi) Training about grain storage systems and value additions.
(vii) Demonstrations of improved Rice, Wheat, Lentil, Bengal Gram, Potato, and vegetable production technologies.
Management of Natural Resources
The state has 5.71 million ha of cultivated area, of which 3.43 million ha (61%) has assured irrigation. The soils are deep alluvial, but suffer due to salinity/alkalinity and nutrient deficiencies of sulphur, boron, and zinc. Occasional flooding and imperfect drainage affect crop growth. Rice, wheat, and winter maize are predominant crops of the state. The productivity of different crops in the state is less than the national average. The total food grains production is 7.7 million tonnes. Suggested interventions for natural resource management for agriculture in the state are as follows:
(i) Site-specific nutrient management on 0.5 million ha to produce additional 2.6 million tonnes of food grains.
(ii) Introduction of pulses and oilseeds on rice fallows with supplementary irrigation facility.
(iii) Zero tillage on 1.5 million ha having excess soil moisture after rice harvest to enhance production by 0.45 million tonnes.
(iv) Promotion of quality protein maize having tremendous food and feed potential.
Managing Risk: Agriculture and Natural Disaster
(i) Need to develop robust decision support systems and agriculture advisory services
With adequate dissemination of weather and price information, it would be possible for small farmers to decide a priori on:
(a) The crop to cultivate in a particular season.
(b) The price hedging mechanism which would be best suited for the product.
(c) The credit or investment required for growing, holding, or transporting the ‘right’ crop.
There is a need to develop and deliver bundled risk management solutions for small and marginal farmers to hedge through futures trading and production risk management by way of index-based insurance in line with the focus on providing Comprehensive Risk Management for vulnerable groups. There is a need to engage in pilot projects to understand the following:
(a) The best channel/medium and infrastructure required to convey the need for a Decision Support System for price risk hedging among poor producers.
(b) The role of formal price risk and weather risk hedging services like National Commodities Derivatives Exchange (NCDEX) in hedging against price risks of small and marginal farmers.
(c) The most efficient mechanism in providing formal production risk hedging mechanisms (index-based insurance). The weather insurance being a cover for covariant weather shocks and not idiosyncratic household risks specific to the farmer.
(d) The provision of price risk products through a ‘Decision Support System’ coupled with an insurance cover could prove to be an ideal risk management strategy for poor households. There is a need to discover the feasibility of its delivery and also quantify the economic benefits to a poor household.
(ii) Need to develop innovative weather risk management products (insurance and derivatives) and price risk management products (commodity futures)
As evident from the comparative scenarios described below, integrating Weather Risk Management and Price Risk Management strategies into the scheme of strategies developed for the development of agriculture in the state provides the much-needed cover against the evident risks of weather and price fluctuations and also becomes an incentive for farmers to graduate to more profitable and risky ventures that assure higher returns.
In a scenario without Risk Management:
Optimum Inputs + Better Farm Management and Sustainable Agricultural Practices + Optimum use of technology + Better Storage, Processing and Marketing Infrastructure + Natural Resource Management + Optimum Credit + Crop specific recommended strategies + Weather Risk + Price Risk = Risk of Yield loss + Uncertain Cash flows in future
In a scenario with Risk Management:
Optimum Inputs + Better Farm Management and Sustainable Agricultural Practices + Optimum use of technology + Better Storage, Processing and Marketing Infrastructure + Natural Resource Management + Optimum Credit + Crop specific recommended strategies + Weather Insurance/Weather Derivative Contract + Commodity Futures = Cover for losses due to Yield Loss + Cover for losses due to fall in Prices
(iii) Need to invest in weather infrastructure
There is a need for investment in installing Automatic Weather Stations (AWS) and setting up a network/grid of weather sensors to generate the much-needed weather data for the state and develop monitoring systems to accentuate the design of index-based weather insurance as well as decision support systems or agriculture advisory services. (The low density of the existing IMD (India Meteorological Department), the unreliable revenue department rain gauges, and lack of transparent and updated weather data across multiple parameters like precipitation, relative humidity, temperature, etc., is a major constraint in developing reliable weather insurance products.)
(iv) Need to factor Disaster Risk into the broad development paradigm
With the increasing frequency and severity of floods in Bihar, emerging risk transfer mechanisms will complement the risk reduction strategies of the Government. There is a definite need for factoring in the Risk from natural disasters into the development policies of the government.
(v) Insurance as a Risk Hedging Mechanism
The risk transfer mechanism (insurance) product is part of risk transfer for floods although not being a risk reduction tool; it is bound to complement the risk reduction strategies. The insurance product is a financing mechanism and is not a mechanism to build any physical infrastructures that would help in risk reduction. But the financing mechanism, if implemented properly, would lead to building proper physical infrastructure that would help in mitigating floods.
(vi) Need for Public Investment in Disaster Infrastructure
Government is the biggest player who can invest in this infrastructure. Additional investment will help the government in ex-post measures for flood risk reduction. Public Partnership models need to be focused upon and developed for long-term strategic development.
Strategy for Sustainable Organic Agriculture
(i) Branding the default organic systems to Certified Organic having potential for domestic or export markets. This can be done at the government expense through APEDA. This can attract buyers for exports of its horticultural or crop produce. Mission mode approach to brand the Organic Brand from Bihar [trademark] for Litchi, mango, banana vegetables, makhana, etc. for urban domestic and export markets. Proper representation at domestic and foreign Organic Trade Shows should be immediately initiated and nurtured.
(ii) A rapid action plan for converting the flood-prone districts to aquaculture through infrastructural development through private or contract farming operations. Functional clusters to be routed for processing operations for bulk marketing. Farm facilitators [NGOs or GO] can help to tie-up between the farmer clusters and the processor and subsequent exporter.
(iii) Bihar Institute of Organic Agriculture (BIOA) can be set up in the state for training, certification, transferring technologies related to production, packaging, processing, and marketing. It may have a PPP for setting up a value chain. BIOA board should have participation of KVKs, Agricultural Universities, APEDA, DOA, and executives of certifying agencies.
(iv) BIOA should advocate a package of practices for organic cultivation with technical help from Universities. The information should be made easily available to farmers by way of demonstration farms, training programs at Farmer’s Field day, and audio-visual aids. Promoting exposure visits of Bihar to other developed areas.
(v) The program to set up soil testing laboratories can be mediated for developing Farm Facilitators through DOA and BIOA. These will further strengthen the development of semi-commercial inputs like compost brews, herbal extracts, parasitoids, predators, etc. State-level network projects through video conferencing can take technology to the farmer’s doorstep. Soil testing labs to be upgraded to test the residues of pesticides at the district level. Block-level farmer information and advisory centers being promoted under ATMA can be effectively linked to TOT prospects.
(vi) Low-cost microbial seed dressing can be made compulsory on the lines of “Immunization to child” equivalent to “immunization for the seed”.
(vii) Methods which destroy the much valuable soil organic matter like burning rice straw and sugarcane trash to be banned. Plough down approach together with economical “No-till” methods should be tested for feasibility.
(viii) Soil Health Cards should be distributed to each farmer involving village panchayats. Bi-annual soil testing should be made compulsory for village-level documentation at a subsidized rate through soil testing laboratories.
(ix) A functional interactive website making total information available about the buyer meeting the producer cluster should be done for developing confidence for adding value to the market chain.
(x) Private entrepreneurs can be invited to set up factories for manufacturing inputs for organic agriculture [biofertilizers, biopesticides, mechanized compost machines, etc.] processing of organic produce [post-harvest], etc.
Strategy for Horticulture
An analysis of horticulture production in Bihar reveals that potential for significant increase in the horticulture production requires investments in all spheres—from institutional to crop management practices. Some strategic measures that can be implemented for the growth of the horticulture sector in Bihar include:
(i) Establishing Horticultural Clusters and Dedicated Horticultural Zones.
(ii) Promoting High-Value Crops and Diversification of Horticultural Production.
(iii) Enhancing Research, Development, and Extension Services for Horticulture.
(iv) Developing Infrastructure for Post-Harvest Management and Processing.
(v) Strengthening Marketing Channels and Value Chains for Horticultural Products.

Development of Small Ruminants
Breeding
(i) Breeding of sheep and goats should aim at increasing body weight, reproductive efficiency, and viability, besides improvement in milk yield in goats.
(ii) Germ plasm stations, either for AI or for distribution of maize, should be set up for each indigenous as well as exotic breed, more in line with bovine semen and bull stations.
(iii) The emphasis in small ruminants should be to improve nutrition, breeding, and health cover.
(iv) Financial support for the production of nucleus flock for each breed.
Animal Nutrition
(i) Production of densified feed blocks for transporting crop residues from surplus to deficit areas and setting up fodder banks.
(ii) Use of bypass protein supplements as top feed for growing, lactating, and pregnant animals.
(iii) Development of biotechnology techniques which can develop recombinant microbes to digest straws, neutralize lignin and its byproducts, and release carbohydrates through a solid-state fermentation process.
(iv) Strict quality assurance in feed requires: (a) Labeling. (b) System of Certification on the quality of Animal Feed. (c) Need to set up at least five laboratories in different regions with modern facilities. (d) Strengthening of existing testing laboratories.
(v) Feed supplementation with mineral mixtures: (a) Region-wise mapping should be done for mineral status, and area-specific mineral mixtures need to be formulated. (b) Use of mineral mixtures needs to be popularized through extension activities. (c) Establishment of a mineral mixture plant for drought-prone/fodder deficit areas.
(vi) Total mixed ration and balancing: (a) Farmers need to be advised to balance the ration of their animals with locally available feed resources. (b) ICAR institutions, KVKs, SAUs, NDDB offices could be used for training field resource persons and implementing the ration balancing program.
(vii) Fodder Seed Production: (a) At least 10% of the total area under fodder production should be earmarked for the production of improved fodder seeds. (b) Large-scale fodder seed production needs to be assigned to dairy cooperatives, NGOs, and private agencies through contract farming.
(viii) An integrated approach for pasture and fodder development in watershed areas is absolutely essential.
Animal Health
(i) Disease reporting, monitoring, and surveillance systems should be strengthened. Infectious and contagious disease reporting should be closely monitored by state animal husbandry departments, dairy and poultry industries, cooperative NGOs, etc.
(ii) Biological production units with marketing networks should be encouraged for the production and supply of diagnostic kits.
(iii) Manpower – a separate cadre of specialists with appropriate qualifications is required to handle the animal health of the State.
(iv) Infectious disease prevention and control programs need to be developed and further strengthened.
Poultry Production
(i) Creation of a network of diagnostic laboratories exclusively for poultry diseases and a prompt disease reporting system.
(ii) Compulsory feed testing through designated laboratories for all commercial feed manufacturers.
(iii) Facilitation of easy finance and easy insurance through NABARD.
(iv) Regulation of contract farming with a legal framework.
(v) Enforcing strict bio-security in poultry farms.
(vi) Program on other avian species like quails, guinea fowls, and turkeys shall be strengthened to improve per capita availability of egg and meat in the State. The focus shall be to replace the local stock with improved egg and meat type breeds and exploring the possibility of introducing emu keeping in view environmental implications.
Backyard Poultry Farming
(i) The focus should be on providing genetic stock and technologies sustainable to rural poultry production.
(ii) Supply of chicks of a desired breed. The low input technology birds should be kept in the State Government Poultry Farms to propagate and multiply. Availability and distribution of these chicks through a supply network should be established.
(iii) Prevention from infectious diseases – Vaccination or treatment arranged for killer diseases or other diseases causing loss in production and body weight gain need to be addressed.
(iv) Adequate shelter - The low-cost shelter with easily available material in a local area of production needs to be addressed.
Training and Human Resource Development
(i) Although the State of Bihar has a college of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry, it is suffering from resource crunch. There is not adequate staff, laboratories, clinics, and other essential teaching tools which are crucial for preparing students in these professions. There is discontent regarding the proportional allocation of resources between agricultural sciences and veterinary sciences. Addressing these issues, a new veterinary university in the State of Bihar may be set up to produce the desired manpower with adequate skill.
(ii) There should be some continuing education programs in these professions through regular training courses.
(iii) Human resource development should be given very high priority in livestock development to meet the qualitative and quantitative shortage of manpower. Optimal requirements of human resources to support various programs need to be worked out and steps taken to generate the same through the involvement of NGOs and the private sector.
Strategy for Fisheries & Aquaculture
Bihar has rich inland fishery resources in the form of rivers and canals (3,200 km), reservoirs (7,200 ha), floodplain wetlands (5,000 ha of Oxbow Lakes and 48,000 ha of chaurs), and ponds (65,000 ha). The average fish production in ponds under FFDA is 2.2 tonnes/ha/year. The state produces 2.66 lakh tonnes of fish annually, but the constraints for realizing higher production levels are access to inputs including seed and feed in production areas, low stocking of floodplain lakes and reservoirs, and market connectivity. The following strategy is suggested for the state:
Reservoirs Fisheries Development
(i) Bihar’s reservoirs account for 0.60 lakh ha. The contribution from reservoirs of the State in total fish production is very low, with an average productivity level of only 5 kg/ha. The productivity ranges from 1.5 to 7.5 kg/ha. Based on the nutrient status of these reservoirs vis-à-vis scientific technologies available in the country, production levels of 30 kg/ha in large, 50 kg/ha in medium, and 200-1000 kg/ha in small reservoirs could easily be achieved by judicious and systematic efforts. Some intricate issues, particularly managerial, such as the presence of carnivorous fishes, tree stumps, dense macrophytes, poor fishery management practices, unregulated destructive types of fishing, sick Fisheries Cooperative Societies (FCS), lack of adequate harvest, post-harvest, and market infrastructure facilities, should be circumvented to raise production levels from these water bodies from abysmally very low levels at present. Other measures that should be put in place include strict enforcement of management rules, observance of closed seasons, providing training and fishing tools to fishermen, intensive extension practices, and observing ethics of responsible fisheries.
(ii) Recent policy decisions to declare aquaculture on par with agriculture to avail various subsidies and making aquaculture income tax-free are laudable steps. Decisions to privatize the fish seed production infrastructure would further need the empowerment of the clients to be able to mortgage the land and buildings for raising funds from financial institutions. For this purpose, a series of rules and regulations would need to be implemented.
(iii) Fisheries Cooperative Societies (FCS) should be made financially and technically strong to meet the challenging post-harvest activities and play a viable role in fish trade and diversification of activities. The present system of auctioning and leasing of the reservoir fisheries rights is highly detrimental in the long term and should be replaced by the cooperative and SHG system. Hence, management of reservoirs by fishermen cooperatives/SHGs located around the reservoirs should be promoted to increase the efficiency and production levels and improve the socio-economic status of the fisherfolk dependent on these resources for their livelihood. Since almost all reservoirs in the State are of small and medium category, they can be used as a modified extensive culture system, which will enhance/increase fish production in these water bodies.
(iv) Further, the poor marketing infrastructure has also depleted the incentives and returns of the fishermen. Therefore, a package approach comprising stocking, monitoring, equitable and just royalty arrangements, market intervention through cooperatives/corporations, and quick transport/distribution channels should be evolved. While the irrigation department could continue to manage the headworks and the canals, the management of the water resource for fisheries in terms of stocking, exploitation, conservation, and fishing rights should be brought under the exclusive control of the State Fisheries Department if the production and productivity of fisheries in reservoirs are to be raised.
(v) A micro-plan should be developed for fisheries development in all reservoirs, through which the fish production level of the major reservoirs could easily be raised from the present production to a minimum of 50 kg per ha for medium reservoirs and 200 kg per ha for small reservoirs by 2020.

Policy Issues for Fisheries and Aquaculture
233. Lack of appropriate leasing policy over the years has been one of the major factors of the ineffective utilization and development of these water bodies for aquaculture. Though certain positive initiatives have been taken by the government in the form of the Bihar Fish Jalkar Management Act 2006 for short and long term leasing of these community water bodies, it needs effective implementation at Gram Panchayat levels. Community approach for integrated development shall aid in the development of aquaculture in these ponds.
(i) For the development of the inland waters, fishing rights must be with the State Fisheries Department. The lease amount should be rationalized with lease duration of 12 years or more and lease rent fixed according to productivity and level of multiple uses. Specific policies should be framed to lease out different sized ponds to fishermen cooperatives, group of fishers or individual fisherman, SHGs, private entrepreneurs in order to have efficient aquaculture management to exploit its full production potential. In addition to this, fisheries graduates can be given preference for taking the pond on lease.
(ii) The policy for promotion and development of aquaculture in the State would include:
(a) Tariff realization in order to give parity with agriculture sector
(b) More vibrant FFDAs
(c) Self-sufficiency in quality and disease-free seed and feed
(d) A suitable legal framework
The strategy would include:
(a) Scientific stocking
(b) Horizontal expansion of farming area
(c) Integrated farming
(d) Contract farming
(e) Species diversification
(f) Transfer of departmental fish farm to private entrepreneurs
(g) Development of approach road to aquaculture clusters
(h) Empowerment of farmers and fisherwomen and utilization of technical expertise of fisheries graduates
(i) Increase in productivity
234. The main strategy for the future should be the vertical expansion, i.e., improving the production of the existing extensive and semi-intensive area, and horizontal expansion, i.e., bringing unutilized cultivable area under scientific extensive/semi-intensive farming and creation of new ponds for aquaculture in the State. In the next fifteen years in a phased manner, the entire existing potential freshwater aquaculture resources would be brought under extensive and semi-intensive fish farming with an average production level of 5 tonnes/ha/annum. This would have far-reaching implications for the future of the Fisheries Sector.
Training and Extension Needs
235. Since training and improvement of culture and fishing skills are highly useful, the Government should take a lead role in organizing training and dissemination camps for imparting latest knowledge and technology to fish farmers and fishery entrepreneurs, with the help and active participation of Central Government Organizations like ICAR Institutes such as CIFE, Mumbai and College of Fisheries of RAU in different aspects of fisheries and aquaculture. Even the training of officers and staff of the Department of Fisheries of the State through refresher courses, trainers training programmes, etc., would go a long way in strengthening and empowering of Government machinery through latest technologies in various aspects of fisheries and aquaculture. Through these interventions, the total fish production per year in Bihar can be increased to about 4.5 lakh tonnes, making the state self-sufficient in fisheries and a possible supply to national markets on the pattern of Andhra Pradesh.
Chapter 11: Implications of Proposed Strategy
236. There are far-reaching implications of the strategy and policy as well as institutional direction proposed in this Report. One of the major implications is a vast financial requirement to implement the proposals during the next 5 – 6 years (2008-09 to 2012-13) against the current plan allocation of Rs.1,698 crores (in the 11th Five Year Plan). Total required outlay for this period is estimated at Rs.27,055 crores. (See Annexure-XXXIX for details). This level of outlays is fully justified to make Bihar the ‘Granary’ of India and a major hub of fruits and vegetables for both national and international markets. Recent field study sponsored by the Task Force (through APEDA) has revealed that Bihar has the capability to produce market expected products of fruits (including honey) and vegetables and there is already a demand for such products in U.K., Middle East, and Mauritius. Another major expected impact is on Bihari farmers’ income, employment, and general living standards.
237. Once agriculture gets revamped, income shall flow to villagers ensuring livelihood security, employment, and empowerment of women. It is expected that productivity of rice, wheat, maize, pulses, oilseeds, sugarcane would increase from 1.5 t/ha to 3.1 t/ha, 2.1 t/ha to 3.1 t/ha, 2.7 t/ha to 4.5 t/ha, 7.3 t/ha to 11.1 t/ha, 1.1 to 1.4 t/ha and 45.5 t/ha to 70.5 t/ha, respectively. The recent level of productivity of rice and wheat is shown in Annexure-XL. Productivity of fruits and vegetables shall increase from the current level of 11.0 t/ha to 15 t/ha and 16.5 to 20.0 t/ha. New area of floricultures, medicinal and aromatic plants, and spices shall be appropriately harnessed. Waste land could be effectively utilized and the state shall emerge as the largest producer of honey and organic produce. The general assessment is that current farm productivity level in Bihar is low in comparison to its potential. Therefore, in order to fully exploit the potential, there would be a need for much higher financial resources.
238. Although Bihar has established a good network for dairy, the health of animals continues to be poor and there is a lot of potential for improvements in animal health and thus scope for addition in animal products and value addition in milk. Similarly, huge water bodies are not appropriately utilized. The report aims to enhance the health of animals, improve the average milk productivity, establish poultry especially backyard poultry, and promote goatery, piggery, and duckiery. Intervention is expected to make livestock production economical – leading to sustainable reward to millions of vulnerable farmers. Further, production of fish is also expected to double in five years in light of the proposed strategy.
239. Implementation of the proposed strategy is expected to create employment of 45,000 million mandays besides making the state produce surplus food to meet the growing demand of the nation, as the state has rich land and water resources. This would empower the people and reverse the trend of going out of state for employment. Resultantly, there shall be parity, equality, and inclusive growth. This would also help the nation from emerging food insecurity.
240. Particular focus has been placed on human resource development with substantially enlarged financial outlays. It is believed that quality human resource at all levels shall be the key to the success of programmes of development. Skill upgradation of officers, extension functionaries, and farmers would be required having institutional arrangements. The trainers will also need training in new areas of innovations to ensure upgraded skill developments.
241. All these would require considerable efforts on monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of various development projects under the proposed strategies and policy direction. Since the proposals are based on ground reality evaluation, which has come out after detailed deliberation with all the stakeholders, there would be a need for developing implementable projects with a time frame, integrating all the efforts together in a ‘Mission Mode’ to address all the issues identified. Since the state has poor infrastructure for delivery, it would also need strengthening. Therefore, with mission objectives, an empowered apex organization should be created which shall oversee the development, provide guidance and ensure effective implementation of the programme. The programme shall have mid-term appraisal for its impact and mid-course correction.
Chapter 12: Conclusions
242. Bihar agriculture has the potential to grow rapidly so as to meet the existing shortages and assume primacy in the national agricultural economy. The State has immense agricultural resources, to facilitate a Second Green Revolution in the Country. Bihar must aim at an annual agricultural rate of 5-6%. However, despite the strength of the agriculture sector, it is a paradox that this sector is growing at a snail’s pace. The rate of growth has been below its potential. There has been a conspicuous failure to exploit those resources to the desired level. This study has endeavoured to identify the factors behind the dismal performance of the sector.
243. A micro-level analysis of the data shows that there are wide productivity differences among different regions in the State. From among the crop sector, yields of maize, gram, and sunflower are higher than the all-India average. But the area under all these crops is very small. The country at present suffers from a severe shortage of pulses and oils. Because of the development of poultry, demand for maize is also rising fast. The study has found that due to an appreciable increase in the irrigated area, there is a likelihood of an increase of over 2 million hectares in the gross cropped area. If so, a major chunk of this area should be allocated to these crops to meet the national requirements and help bring sustained food security of the country.
244. Productivity levels in Bihar compared with other States and the all-India average show huge gaps. The low productivity of major crops is to be examined in the light of poor infrastructure and institutional framework. Add to that various agronomic factors like poor quality of seed, unbalanced and inadequate use of fertilizers, practically no use of micro-nutrients, little knowledge of pest management, lack of proper machinery, and finally poor extension services. The results are obvious.
245. Available data reveals that the country is going to face the challenges of food security in the light of decreasing food production over the last decade. The current overall growth rate of farm production at the level of 2.5-2.0% due to shrinkage in cultivable area and changing global climate, the national and global food stock is expected to be at a comparatively lower level. Fortunately, Bihar is uniquely placed to fill in the gap and provide the major granary for India, if proper strategic and policy directions are set for enhanced farm production. The Road Map in this Report provides this.
246. It needs to be clearly borne in mind that business as usual will not yield the desired result in terms of achieving accelerated agriculture growth in Bihar. If Bihar has to be put on the mainstream of India’s development map, concerted efforts will have to be made on a war footing. There is a need for an in-depth study of the factors responsible for low productivity levels in the concerned regions which will provide the key to improving production. Applying new technology - Zero Till, Bed Planting for wheat, System for Rice Intensification (SRI) Technique for rice, Site-Specific Nutrient Management for rice and wheat, and hybrids for maize, encouraging results have been achieved within Bihar itself on farmers’ fields. These need to be developed at a larger scale for making Bihar the ‘Granary’ of India and help India in maintaining food security.
247. Taking care of these factors along with other local issues as discussed, the emerging production scenario for 2011-12 has been projected (Annexure XXXVII & Annexure XXXVIII). It gives an additional production of 2 million tonnes each of rice and wheat, 3.4 million tonnes of maize, over 4 lakh tonnes of gram, and over a million tonnes of oilseeds along with 9 million tonnes of sugarcane. The Government of India has a target of 10 million tonnes of rice, 8 million tonnes of wheat, and 2 million tonnes of pulses under the XI Plan (National Food Security Fund). The Government of Bihar should take full advantage of the funds allocated under the Scheme for ensuring high-quality seed, fertilizer, and large-scale demonstration, etc., and can thus become a major partner in this programme.
248. The agro-climatic diversity in the State with its high rainfall distributed over a five-month monsoon and a reasonably long and moderate winter allows for a variety of horticultural crops to be grown. An analysis of horticulture production in Bihar reveals that potential for significant increase in horticulture production requires investments in all spheres – from institutional to crop management practices. Animal Husbandry and Dairy are the subsidiary income-generating activities for the rural poor of Bihar. Therefore, the progress in this sector will result in more balanced development in the rural economy. The main strategy should be to increase livestock production through controlled breeding programmes, strengthen infrastructural facilities, and ensure animal health cover.
249. Soil conservation practices are very important for Bihar which is ridden with floods and drought. The prime focus of organic agriculture is the management of soil organic matter to enhance the chemical, physical, and biological properties of soil. The concept of feeding the soils rather than the plants forms the basis of the sustainable approach for organic farming in the State.
250. Agriculture is the single largest private sector occupation in the State and can be considered the riskiest business. Increasing income of the land-owning and landless rural population through increased production by enhancing productivity and intensity of farming, and by generating more employment in agriculture and other rural-based production activities alone is not the solution, and there is a need to integrate these endeavours with effective risk management strategies to cover potential losses in yield and hence incomes. This Report covers this aspect.
251. The most important lesson for Bihar is to capitalize on strength and convert weakness into opportunity through the creation of infrastructure, adoption of technologies, strengthening of research, agricultural education, market orientation, and agricultural enterprises. Success story of other states could also be tried as a mode. The crux of the matter is that Bihar has the potentialities of being the forerunner of the Second Green Revolution. But the policy of ‘business as usual’ will not do. The state has to make efforts on a war footing, intensify their activity, and implement the programmes at the ground level. The proper exploitation of opportunities in Bihar would be the opportunity for India to emerge as the economically sound nation in the world. This will be based on a dynamic agriculture sector.

