Abstract
Bihar’s agricultural development in the latest 10 years between 2005-06 and 2014-15 presents a mixed picture. Agriculture growth was around 4.7 percent, which was above the national average of 3.6 percent, and in the latest five years, its performance was even more commendable, with an average annual growth rate of 7.1 percent. However, the agricultural productivity of two of its major crops, rice and wheat, is lower than the national average, despite the relatively high private investment in yield-augmenting inputs such as fertilizers, certified seeds, tube wells, and farm machines.
Bihar’s agriculture has diversified impressively through dairy development, although productivity in milk production is lagging behind other major milk-producing states. Poultry development has not taken off. In this paper, we study the composition, sources, and drivers of agricultural growth in Bihar with a view to identifying the factors that explain the paradox of low agricultural productivity and high use of productivity augmenting inputs. The study finds that poor public investment in power, all-weather roads, and marketing infrastructure have constrained agriculture in Bihar.
In particular, deficiencies in the power infrastructure have resulted in high dependency on diesel for pumping out groundwater for irrigation; this, along with soaring petroleum prices, has depressed returns from the cultivation of crops. Further, the proportion of surfaced roads in the state is one of the lowest in the country and needs attention in order to link farmers to markets. Another major difficulty that farmers in Bihar face is the lack of marketing infrastructure, resulting in their inability to reap the price incentives given by the Government of India in the form of minimum support price. Livestock development has not achieved its potential because of strategic deficiencies.
In dairy, productivity has remained low because germ plasm from superior breeds has not been used. In poultry, the culture of contract farming involving large integrator companies has not yet been adopted. In light of these findings, the study makes five principal recommendations to stimulate agricultural growth and productivity in the state, viz., improve the quality and quantity of rural power supply by strengthening transmission and distribution and obtaining separation of feeders for irrigation, increase in the intensity of surfaced roads in rural areas, improve procurement and marketing infrastructure, improve health and reproduction management of dairy animals, and obtain a quantum increase in poultry by employing the integrator model as has been done in states like Andhra Pradesh and Odisha.

Executive Summary
Bihar is endowed with abundant natural resources, especially fertile soil and groundwater. Yet, it is one of the poorest states in the country. Bihar's per capita income (Rs 15,506 in FY14) was around 39 percent of the all-India average (Rs 39,904 in FY14). It is even lower than Chhattisgarh (Rs 28,373) and Jharkhand (Rs 28,882) – the poorest states in the country. Moreover, it remains way below states like Sikkim (Rs 83,527), Maharashtra (Rs 69,097), Haryana (Rs 67,260), and Gujarat (Rs 63,168). In terms of poverty, 34 percent of Bihar's population is poor, compared to the all-India figure of 22 percent.
A study by the World Bank (World Bank Report, 2008) shows that agriculture growth has the potential to reduce poverty faster than growth generated from other sectors. This is particularly so as 89 percent of poverty in Bihar is rural, and 74 percent of its workforce is dependent on agriculture. Bihar’s agricultural development in the last 10 years between 2005-06 and 2014-15 presents a mixed picture. Agricultural growth was around 4.7 percent, which was above the national average of 3.6 percent, and in the latest five years, its performance was even more commendable, with an average annual growth rate of 7.1 percent. However, agricultural productivity of two of its major crops, rice and wheat, is lower than the national average, despite the relatively high private investment in yield-augmenting inputs such as fertilizers, certified seeds, tube wells, and farm machines.
Bihar’s agriculture has diversified impressively through dairy development, but poultry development has not taken off, and its productivity in milk production is also lagging behind other major milk-producing states in the country. In this paper, we study the composition, sources, and drivers of agricultural growth in Bihar with a view to identifying the factors that explain the paradox of low agricultural productivity and high use of productivity augmenting inputs.
The study finds that in recent years, there has been an encouraging development towards diversification and the livestock sector, particularly dairy farming, has gained importance. The share of dairy products in the total value of output from agriculture and allied activities (GVOA) increased from 14 percent in TE 2003-04 to 23 percent in TE 2013-14, while at the all-India level, the share of dairy farming in GVOA remained at 17 percent in the same period. Between 2001-02 and 2013-14, milk production in Bihar increased from 2.7 million tonnes to 7.2 million tonnes, a CAGR of 7.9 percent. Despite this impressive growth in production, milk productivity in Bihar is lower than in some of the other states; for example, while Bihar’s productivity in milk production stood at 0.7 mt per lactating animal, Punjab’s productivity was 2.4 mt per lactating animal, Gujarat 1.1 mt per lactating animal, UP 1.0 mt per lactating animal, and MP 0.8 mt per lactating animal. The study finds that productivity of milk has remained low because germ plasm from superior breeds has not been used in Bihar. For example, the exotic/crossbred female cattle population in Punjab is 91.5 percent of the total female cattle population, while that of Bihar was only 32.9 percent in 2012. The potential yield from cross-bred cows is much higher than that from indigenous breeds. On average, a cross-bred cow yields 7.2 liters a day nationally, but in Punjab, a typical cross-bred cow yields about 11.2 liters a day, while in Bihar, it is only 6.5 liters a day. This means, cross-bred yield in Bihar is almost half of the yield in Punjab. The production trait of milk-producing cattle in Punjab is better than in Bihar because of the use of germ plasm from superior breeds in cross-breeding in the former.
Although the dairying sector is growing in importance in Bihar, food grain cultivation continues to be significant. The cropping pattern in Bihar has not undergone much change over the years in as much as cereals remain dominant, accounting for about 79 percent of the acreage. Although the production of the two main crops grown in the state – rice and wheat – has increased over the years, productivity of these two crops has remained below the national average. In fact, Bihar’s productivity in rice (2.0 mt/ha in TE 2014-15) is lower than the national average of 2.4 mt/ha and much lower than states like Punjab (4 mt/ha), Haryana (3.2 mt/ha), Tamil Nadu, and Andhra Pradesh (3.0 mt/ha). Similarly, wheat yields in Bihar (2.2 mt/ha) are lower than the national average (3 mt/ha) and much lower than states like Punjab (4.7 mt/ha), Haryana (4.3 mt/ha), and Rajasthan, Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh (3 mt/ha).
This trend of rice and wheat yield lagging behind the national average is striking when seen against the trends in the use of yield-enhancing assets and inputs. For example, irrigation coverage in Bihar is around 68.5 percent of the gross cropped area as compared to the national average of 47.6 percent (2012-13). Consumption of fertilizer has also been increasing over the past decade. According to the data made available by the Fertilizer Association of India (FAI), the apparent consumption of fertilizers in the state is around 199.7 kg per hectare against the all-India figure of around 130.8 kg/ha (2012-13). Mechanization has also been making progress in Bihar with a robust expansion in the use of zero tillage machines from just 126 machines in 2008-09 to 9,760 units in 2013-14, a CAGR of 106.5 percent. Similarly, combine harvesters have increased from 55 units in 2008-09 to 261 units in 2013-14, a CAGR of 29.6 percent. Another significant development has been a rapid increase in the seed replacement rates of the three major crops. In the early 2000s, Bihar’s seed replacement rates for paddy, wheat, and maize were as low as 6.3 percent, 8.4 percent, and 21.2 percent respectively, but these have increased to 38 percent, 34.8 percent, and 100 percent respectively by 2011-12.
Irrigation, fertilizers, quality seeds, and mechanization are the main inputs required to improve the productivity of crops. Currently, Bihar is on par with or above the national average in the utilization of all these inputs, and yet there is a yield gap. The paradox here is that despite investment by farmers in technology and inputs, their returns are low. Like Kishore, Sharma, and Joshi (2014), we too find that poor public infrastructure and poor incentive structure has negated the benefits of private investments in irrigation, fertilizer use, mechanization, and certified seed use and has kept productivity of crops low. For example, Bihar has an ultimate irrigation potential (UIP) of about 10 million ha, of which surface water irrigation potential (major, medium, and minor) is about 6.2 million ha, and groundwater potential is about 3.8 million ha. Although UIP created until 2012-13 is about 7.6 million ha (5.3 million ha through surface irrigation and 2.2 million ha through groundwater), utilization is only about 4.2 million ha or 55.7 percent of the UIP. This is due to poor transmission and distribution infrastructure, among other reasons. Similarly, although the intensity of road coverage is much higher in Bihar than in other states, the proportion of surfaced roads (which are all-weather roads) is one of the lowest. Further, the state’s marketing infrastructure is weak, resulting in its farmers’ inability to reap the price incentives given by the Government of India in the form of minimum support price (MSP). The incidence of government procurement is negligible in Bihar – only about 3 percent of the rice and wheat output is procured by the government.
Although the Agriculture Produce Marketing Committee (APMC) Act has been repealed in Bihar in 2006 with the objective of facilitating free trade, infrastructure to support a competitive market is grossly lacking, thereby making farmers worse off. Because there is no physical market or mandis in Bihar, farmers have to pay commission, marketing, and other charges to intermediaries. Further, poor power infrastructure has resulted in high dependency on diesel for pumping out groundwater for irrigation, depressing returns from the cultivation of crops. If the cost of pumping out groundwater using a diesel pump is about Rs 75-80 per hour (due to the increase in petroleum prices in recent years), the cost of pumping out groundwater using an electric pump is just Rs 8-9 per hour. As per our estimates, this dependence on diesel for irrigation instead of electric pumps raises the cost of cultivation by Rs 7,000 to 8,000 per hectare for paddy in Bihar. The study also finds that strategic deficiencies have constrained livestock development. For instance, poor quality of breeds and poor health and reproduction management of dairy animals are major problems. Further, poultry development has not taken off in Bihar because of the poor adoption of the model of contract farming as done in states like Andhra Pradesh and Odisha.

 
1. Introduction
Over the past 60 years, Indian agriculture has made remarkable progress in food grain production. During this time, India has transformed from a food-deficit nation to a food-surplus country, despite the population increasing from 361 million to 1.2 billion. The country has also diversified its agriculture from cereals to high-value commodities. India is now the world's second-largest producer of wheat, rice, fruits, vegetables, and cotton, as well as the largest producer of milk and pulses. However, agricultural development has been uneven across states. While states like Punjab (during the early Green Revolution), Gujarat, and more recently, Madhya Pradesh have capitalized on growth opportunities, others like Odisha and Uttar Pradesh have lagged behind in several development indicators. Bihar, on the other hand, has recorded a high agricultural growth rate in recent years compared to other states. Between 2005-06 and 2014-15, Bihar's agricultural sector grew at 5.6 percent, compared to the national average of 3.6 percent. However, this growth rate has been extremely volatile due to recurring natural disasters and is highly sensitive to the choice of the initial and final years. Moreover, productivity in agricultural crops remains low compared to the national average despite the significant use of productivity-enhancing inputs such as fertilizers, quality certified seeds, and farm machinery. Dairy development has also shown impressive growth, yet milk productivity lags behind that of major milk-producing states in India. This paper explores the reasons behind this paradox of low agricultural productivity and high input usage in crops, as well as robust expansion but low productivity in dairy, while analyzing the sources and drivers of agricultural growth in Bihar.
In Section 2, we discuss the data sources and methodology used in the study. Section 3 provides a description of the geographical and demographic features, as well as the land and water resources of the state, while briefly reviewing natural calamities that have afflicted agriculture. Section 4 examines the composition and sources of agricultural growth in the state. In Section 5, we discuss the status of physical infrastructure in Bihar and the drivers of agricultural growth using econometric analysis. Section 6 concludes with recommendations for policy interventions that would stimulate and sustain agricultural growth in the state.
2. Data and Methodology
The study uses secondary data compiled from various published sources, covering the period from 2000-01 to 2014-15. We analyze and compare Bihar's performance against that of other states. For comparison, we have selected two sub-groups of three comparator states each: the first comprising Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, and Punjab, and the second, Bihar, Odisha, and Uttar Pradesh. Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh have experienced rapid agricultural growth in the past decade, while Punjab achieved high growth during the Green Revolution. Bihar, Odisha, and Uttar Pradesh are considered moderately performing states due to their poor agricultural growth and high poverty rates.
To examine the composition of agriculture, we calculated the share of the value of output from different segments as a percentage of the total value of output from agriculture and allied activities. To study the sources of growth, we deflated the current series of each segment by the Wholesale Price Index (WPI) at 2004-05 prices and then decomposed the year-on-year growth in the gross value of output from agriculture and allied activities (GVOA) by taking the absolute year-on-year difference in GVO from each segment as a proportion of the previous year’s GVO from agriculture and allied activities.
The drivers of growth were analyzed using a three-step procedure to estimate the association between agricultural growth and selected control variables. First, we tested if the natural logarithm of the selected variables was integrated of the same order using the Augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) test. Based on the outcome of the test, in the second stage, we determined if the series were co-integrated (i.e., testing for a long-term relationship between the variables) using Engle and Granger’s (1986) two-stage residual-based method. This method was adopted because we are interested in the elasticity of the explanatory variables. Accordingly, we first ran an ordinary least square model to analyze the determinants of agricultural growth in Bihar and then performed a unit root test on the residuals of the model to examine if it was stationary. The null hypothesis in the Engle-Granger procedure is no co-integration, and the alternative is co-integration.
3. Agriculture in Bihar
3.1 Geography, Demography, and Structural Composition
Bihar is a land-locked state situated in the eastern part of India, bordered by West Bengal to the east, Uttar Pradesh to the west, Nepal to the north, and Jharkhand to the south. The state covers a total geographical area of 9.4 million hectares and is divided into three agro-climatic zones: northwest alluvial, northeast alluvial, and south Bihar alluvial plains.
As of 2016, Bihar's population was approximately 115.2 million, accounting for about 8.8 percent of India’s population. It is the third most populous state, following Uttar Pradesh and Maharashtra. The state has a very high population density of 1,218 people per square kilometer, compared to the national average of 396 people per square kilometer, which increases pressure on land and exacerbates rural poverty. Approximately 88.5 percent of the population lives in rural areas, compared to the national average of 68.8 percent, making Bihar largely a rural economy. Like the rest of the country, Bihar has undergone a structural shift from agriculture towards industry and services. The agricultural sector’s share in the total Gross State Domestic Product (GSDP) has declined from 32.8 percent in the Triennium Ending (TE) 2003-04 to 22.0 percent in TE 2013-14, with a corresponding increase in the share of industry and services. Despite this decline in share, around 74 percent of the workforce relies on the agricultural sector for their livelihood, compared to the national average of 55 percent (Census 2011). Further, around 72 percent of the total agricultural workforce consists of agricultural laborers, while only 28 percent are cultivators (Census 2011), compared to the national average of 55 percent and 45 percent, respectively. The rural population in Bihar is not completely dependent on agriculture but also earns a part of their income as wage laborers, migrant laborers, and small entrepreneurs. The composition of agricultural income in the state is such that 48.2 percent is contributed by cultivation, 37.2 percent by wages, 7.8 percent by farming of animals, and 6.7 percent by farm business (NSS 70th Round).
3.2 Water Resources and Climatic Risk
Bihar is divided into three agro-climatic zones: northwest alluvial, northeast alluvial, and south Bihar alluvial plains. The soil in the northwest region is mainly loam and sandy loam; the northeast region has loam and clay loam; and the south zone has sandy loam, loam, clay, and clay loam (Department of Agriculture, Bihar).
The state lies in the tropical and sub-tropical region, with an average rainfall of around 1,028 mm during the monsoon season. Approximately 85 percent of the total rainfall (normal 1,198 mm) in the state is received between June and September. However, there is wide variation in rainfall across agro-climatic zones; for example, the northwest zone receives a mean rainfall of 1,234.7 mm, the northeast zone 1,382.2 mm, and the south zone 1,102.1 mm.
Bihar's topography is described as a fertile alluvial plain lying wholly in the Gangetic Valley. The state is richly endowed with water resources, both ground and surface water. Besides rainfall, rivers that flow within the state are an important source of water. The main defining feature of the state is that the River Ganges flows through it and divides it broadly into water-abundant North and South Bihar. North Bihar benefits from the Himalayan Rivers, while South Bihar has rivers originating from central India. Most of the rivers in North Bihar, such as the Saryu (Ghaghra), Gandak, Burhi Gandak, Bagmati, Kamla-Balan, Koshi, and Mahananda (Adhwara group of rivers), are of Himalayan origin and have a considerable portion of their catchment in the glacial regions of Nepal and Tibet. They are positioned to receive copious amounts of rainfall during the monsoons. The southern part of Bihar, on the other hand, is drained by rivers that are largely rain-fed, having their origin either in the Vindhyachal Hills or in the hills of Chhotanagpur and Rajmahal. These rivers are either dry or have scanty discharge in non-monsoon months. Karmanasa, Sone, Punpun, Kiul, Badua, and Chandan are important rivers in this region.
Bihar's vast water resources also make it India’s most flood-prone state (Water Resource Department, Bihar). North Bihar, where around 76 percent of the population resides, is subject to recurring floods. The rivers of North Bihar, with 65 percent of their large catchment areas in the Himalayas in Nepal/Tibet, cause floods in around 74 percent of its geographical area. These rivers carry large amounts of water and a very high sediment load, which is deposited in the plains of Bihar (Water Resource Department, Bihar). Between 2000 and 2015, Bihar experienced severe floods in 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2007, 2008, and 2013. According to data from the Flood Management Information System of Bihar, between 2004 and 2013, 4 million hectares of cropped area, 71.1 million population, and 23 million houses were affected. In contrast to the excess water in North Bihar, South Bihar faces water shortages. In fact, the two climatic risks that most affect agriculture in Bihar are floods and droughts. Around 40 percent of the area in South Bihar is classified as drought-prone. There were severe droughts in 2002, 2009, 2010, and 2013.
4. Composition and Sources of Agricultural Growth
4.1 Agricultural Composition
The agricultural economy of Bihar is a combination of both subsistence and commercialized agriculture. In TE 2013-14, the total value of output from agriculture and allied activities was estimated at around Rs. 1.2 lakh crore at current prices, of which crop production accounted for 80 percent, followed by livestock (17 percent), fishing (3 percent), and forestry and logging (less than 1 percent). Rice and wheat are the major food grains grown in the state, occupying 3.2 million hectares (36.6 percent) and 2.1 million hectares (24.7 percent) of the gross cropped area (GCA) in TE 2013-14, respectively. While rice is a Kharif crop, wheat is cultivated in the Rabi season. The state also grows maize, pulses, oilseeds, fruits, and vegetables, with increasing diversification towards horticulture. In TE 2013-14, the share of fruits and vegetables in the total GCA was around 16 percent.
Livestock plays a vital role in the rural economy of Bihar, particularly for small and marginal farmers and landless agricultural laborers. The state ranks first in the country in terms of the density of livestock population per 1,000 hectares, and it has the second-largest cattle population after Uttar Pradesh. In 2012, Bihar had 33 million livestock, of which cattle and buffalo constituted around 60 percent of the population. The state has also witnessed growth in milk production, with the highest average annual growth rate of 9 percent between 2001-02 and 2012-13, against the national average of 4.4 percent (GoI 2015a). Despite the growth, milk productivity remains lower than in other major milk-producing states such as Punjab and Gujarat.
4.2 Sources of Agricultural Growth
The decomposition of agricultural growth reveals that crop production has been the major driver of growth in Bihar. Between 2000-01 and 2014-15, crop production contributed around 60 percent to overall agricultural growth, followed by livestock at 29 percent, and fishing and forestry combined contributed 11 percent. The major source of growth in crop production has been the expansion in the area under cultivation and the improvement in yield levels. However, yield levels in major crops, especially rice and wheat, are still lower than the national average and significantly below those in Punjab, Gujarat, and Madhya Pradesh. The high growth in livestock has been driven by an increase in the population of cattle and buffaloes, particularly in the number of crossbred cattle. Milk production in the state has grown by 8.8 percent per annum between 2000-01 and 2014-15.
5. Physical Infrastructure and Drivers of Growth
5.1 Physical Infrastructure
Despite recent progress, Bihar lags behind in infrastructure development, including roads, electricity, irrigation, and market access, compared to other states. Bihar has one of the lowest road densities in the country, with only 2.6 km per square kilometer of area, compared to the national average of 3.1 km. The state has made significant improvements in rural roads through the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY), which has improved connectivity in rural areas. However, the quality and maintenance of these roads remain a concern.
Electricity is another major bottleneck in Bihar. The per capita electricity consumption in Bihar is 144 kWh, which is significantly lower than the national average of 957 kWh. The state has the lowest percentage of electrified households in the country, with only 23 percent of households having access to electricity. In rural areas, this figure drops to 15 percent, compared to the national average of 55 percent. The lack of electricity affects agricultural productivity as it limits the use of modern farming equipment and irrigation systems.
Irrigation is critical for agriculture in Bihar, given the erratic rainfall and frequent droughts. The state has made progress in expanding irrigation coverage, with 57 percent of the gross cropped area being irrigated in TE 2013-14, compared to 48 percent in TE 2003-04. However, the dependence on diesel pumps for irrigation is high, which increases the cost of cultivation. The state has abundant groundwater resources, but the development and utilization of these resources are limited due to the high cost of diesel and the lack of electricity.
Market access is another area where Bihar lags behind. The state has only 147 regulated markets, which is inadequate to cater to the needs of its large agricultural population. The density of markets in Bihar is one of the lowest in the country, with one market serving 3,000 square kilometers, compared to the national average of 435 square kilometers. The lack of market access affects the price realization for farmers, leading to lower incomes.
5.2 Drivers of Agricultural Growth
The econometric analysis of the drivers of agricultural growth in Bihar reveals that infrastructure development, especially roads and electricity, has a significant positive impact on agricultural productivity. The availability of credit and extension services also plays a crucial role in enhancing agricultural growth. The study found that the growth of non-farm income, particularly from wage labor and migration, has a positive effect on agricultural productivity, as it provides additional income for farmers to invest in agriculture.
The recurrent spells of deficient rains  in recent years  have caused a decline in groundwater 
levels in certain parts of the state. Figure 3  shows the comparative picture of the level of 
ground water district -wise in 2012 a nd 2015 after the monsoon. It is seen that the ground 
water level has been declining in south Bihar and in certain pockets in north Bihar as well.  
Figure 3: Status of Groundwater water level in Bihar  
 
 
The bifurcation of Bihar in 2000-01 significantly altered its geographical landscape. Originally, Bihar encompassed 17.4 million hectares, but 8.0 million hectares were allocated to Jharkhand, leaving Bihar with 9.4 million hectares. Over the years, the land use pattern in Bihar has remained relatively stable, with minimal changes in areas such as forests and non-cultivating lands. However, there has been a notable decline in the net sown area from 60.6% to 57.2% between TE 2003-04 and TE 2012-13, accompanied by an increase in fallow land, primarily due to waterlogging issues.

The decline in net sown area has led to a reduction in the gross cropped area by 0.4 million hectares or nearly 5% during the same period. The scarcity of land for agricultural purposes in Bihar is further highlighted by the fact that the gross cropped area per 100 persons in the state is only 7.2 hectares, much lower than states like Madhya Pradesh and Punjab.

Bihar's cropping pattern is predominantly focused on cereals, which account for about 79% of the gross cropped area, significantly higher than the national average of 51%. Rice and wheat dominate this sector, with rice being the primary kharif crop and wheat the key rabi crop. While the share of rice in the gross cropped area has declined, the acreage of wheat and maize has increased.

Agricultural growth in Bihar has been impressive in recent years, with the state recording a growth rate of 4.7% between 2005-06 and 2014-15, surpassing the national average of 3.6%. The agricultural GDP in Bihar has seen fluctuations, but the average annual growth rate reached 7.1% in the last five years of the period.

The composition of Bihar's agriculture sector has also evolved. The share of livestock in the Gross Value of Output from Agriculture and Allied Activities (GVOA) increased from 24% in 2000-01 to 33% in 2013-14, while the contribution of food grains and horticulture declined. Milk has emerged as a significant driver of agricultural growth in Bihar.

Despite the challenges, Bihar has shown resilience and growth in its agricultural sector, particularly in the production of cereals like rice and wheat, and cash crops such as maize and sugarcane. However, issues like waterlogging, limited access to irrigation, and low adoption of high-yielding varieties continue to impact productivity.

Fruits and Vegetables Segment

The share of fruits and vegetables in Bihar's Gross Value of Output from Agriculture (GVOA) decreased from 30% in the triennium ending (TE) 2002-03 to 20% in TE 2013-14. However, in absolute terms, the output value of fruits and vegetables grew significantly from ₹81.6 billion to ₹172.4 billion during the same period. Vegetables dominate this segment, with the state dedicating around 11% of its gross cropped area (GCA) to vegetable production, far exceeding the national average of 5.0%. In TE 2013-14, Bihar was the third-largest vegetable producer in India, accounting for 8.9% of the total, trailing only West Bengal (14.9%) and Uttar Pradesh (11.8%). Potato is the most important vegetable crop in Bihar, occupying around 38% of the state's vegetable area. Other major vegetables include cauliflower, okra, brinjal, onion, tomato, and cabbage.

Bihar is also the third-largest potato producer in India, after Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. In TE 2013-14, potato yield in Bihar was 20.2 MT per hectare, compared to the all-India average of 21.9 MT per hectare. The state’s productivity in vegetables like okra, brinjal, onion, and tomato is higher than the national average, although it lags in crops like cauliflower and cabbage. However, Bihar is gradually closing the gap in these areas, highlighting the potential of vegetable cultivation in the state.

Bihar devotes about 4% of its GCA to fruit cultivation, slightly above the national average of 3.4%. The primary fruits grown in the state are mango, banana, litchi, and guava. In TE 2013-14, mango orchards occupied 49% of the area under fruit cultivation, followed by banana (11%), litchi (10.4%), and guava (9.9%). The state’s fruit productivity is around 13.5 MT per hectare, higher than the national average of 11.8 MT per hectare. Bihar is the leading litchi-producing state, contributing about 42.7% of the country’s total production, and ranks fifth in mango production, contributing approximately 8% of the total. Mango and litchi account for about 59.4% of the fruit cultivation area in Bihar.

Paradox of Stagnant Productivity and Increased Input Use in Crop Production

Although rice and wheat dominate Bihar’s agriculture, their productivity growth has been slow, and yields remain below the national average. This is also the case for sugarcane and potatoes. Despite this, Bihar’s farmers have increasingly adopted yield-enhancing inputs such as quality seeds, irrigation, and fertilizers.

In the early 2000s, Bihar’s seed replacement rates (SRR) for crops like paddy and wheat were low, at 6.3% and 8.4%, respectively. However, the Bihar government’s initiatives, including the Agriculture Road Map (ARM)-I and various seed promotion programs, have significantly improved SRR. By 2011-12, SRR had risen to 38% for paddy, 34.8% for wheat, and 100% for maize, surpassing the national average for maize.

Alongside better seed usage, irrigation coverage in Bihar increased from 57% of GCA in 2001-02 to 68.5% in 2012-13, compared to the national average of 47.6%. Fertilizer consumption also rose from 87.5 kg/hectare in 2003-04 to 199.7 kg/hectare in 2012-13, significantly higher than the national average of 130.8 kg/hectare. Despite this, concerns remain about the diversion of subsidized fertilizers to neighboring countries, which could distort fertilizer usage patterns.

Farm mechanization has been another focus area for Bihar’s agricultural strategy. The state has seen a substantial increase in the adoption of zero-tillage machines and combine harvesters, although the use of power tillers has declined slightly. Despite these efforts, the lack of updated land records and collateral issues have limited farmers' access to agricultural credit, which could further enhance productivity.

Livestock Sector

Animal husbandry and dairy are crucial income-generating activities for Bihar’s rural population, alongside crop cultivation. The livestock sector’s share in GVOA increased from 25.4% in TE 2002-03 to 31% in TE 2013-14, surpassing the national average of 26%. The composition of the livestock sector has shifted, with the share of meat decreasing and the share of milk increasing.

Milk Segment

The milk sector has been the main driver of growth in Bihar’s livestock sector. The share of milk in GVOA increased from 14% in TE 2003-04 to 23% in TE 2013-14, while the national share remained at 17%. About 55% of the milk produced in Bihar is cow milk, and 42% is buffalo milk.

Bihar's milk production grew from 2.7 million tonnes in 2001-02 to 7.2 million tonnes in 2013-14, with a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 7.9%, compared to the national average of 3.8%. However, Bihar's milk productivity remains lower than states like Punjab, Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh, and Madhya Pradesh, primarily due to a lower proportion of genetically superior cattle (crossbred). While crossbred cattle make up 32.9% of Bihar’s female cattle population, this is still significantly lower than in states like Punjab, where the proportion is 91.5%.

The Bihar State Milk Co-operative Federation (COMFED), established in 1983, has played a pivotal role in developing the state’s dairy sector. COMFED's cooperative model, similar to the Anand pattern in Gujarat, has seen robust growth in milk procurement, but only about 10% of the milk produced in Bihar is currently processed by COMFED, indicating a substantial untapped market for milk processing in the state.

                                                           
Meat Segment

The meat sector in Bihar constitutes about 5% of the Gross Value of Output from Agriculture (GVOA), with a slight decline from 6% in the early 2000s. Meat production in the state increased by a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 4.7% between 2001-02 and 2013-14, which is significantly lower than the national average of 9.5%. Consequently, Bihar's share in India's total meat production dropped from 8.3% in the early 2000s to 4.2% by 2013-14. Currently, Bihar is the eighth largest meat-producing state, following Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, West Bengal, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Haryana, and Kerala.

Mutton constitutes the largest share of meat production in Bihar at 22.5%, followed by pork at 20.5%, and buffalo meat at 15.2%. Poultry meat accounts for only 12.2% of total meat production as of 2012-13. However, poultry has shown the fastest growth rate among meat types, driven by the expansion of poultry farms and hatcheries, contrasting with a decline in backyard poultry. From 2007 to 2012, the number of poultry birds in broiler farms increased from 3.1 million to 5.1 million, reflecting a CAGR of 7.8%, surpassing the national average of 6.3%.

In terms of specific meat types, Bihar contributed 7% of India's mutton production in 2012-13, ranking as the fifth-largest producer. It is the second-largest pork producer, with 13.2% of India's total pig meat production. For buffalo meat, Bihar ranks sixth in the country, contributing 4% to national production.

Despite plans under the Agricultural Roadmap (ARM-II) to boost meat production through goat distribution, establishment of feed factories, modern slaughterhouses, and chick distribution programs, only the chick distribution initiative, implemented through the Jeevika program, saw any significant progress due to funding shortages.

Fishery Segment

Bihar is endowed with rich aquatic resources, including approximately 3,200 km of rivers, 100,000 hectares of chaurs and floodplains, 9,000 hectares of oxbow lakes, 7,200 hectares of reservoirs, and 6,900 hectares of ponds and tanks. Despite these resources, the fishery sector contributes only about 5.2% of the total agricultural output. The state's fish production does not meet its demand, positioning Bihar as the ninth-largest fish-producing state in India.

As a landlocked state, Bihar's fishery depends entirely on inland resources. In 2013-14, the state produced about 0.43 million tonnes of fish, representing 4.3% of India's total fish production. This increased to 0.48 million tonnes in 2014-15, showing an 11% year-on-year growth.

A 2008 ICAR report identified significant potential for expanding inland fishery, particularly in ponds and oxbow lakes. The report suggested interventions like clearing weed infestations, renovating ponds, establishing brood banks and hatcheries, and leasing water bodies for fish production. Some of these recommendations were incorporated into ARM-II, which proposed fingerling rearing by farmers, construction of large rearing ponds, and leasing ponds for long-term development. Additionally, ARM-II planned to establish feed mills, wholesale and retail outlets, refrigerated vans, cold storage, and ice plants at the district level, alongside training for farmers and extension workers.

This section provides a detailed analysis of the impact of floods on agriculture in Bihar, the state's approach to flood protection, and challenges in the energy and infrastructure sectors affecting agriculture.

5.1.2 Floods and Flood Protection
Agriculture in Bihar has been highly vulnerable to floods and droughts, with significant contractions in agricultural growth during years of severe floods (e.g., 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2007, 2008, 2013) or droughts (e.g., 2005, 2007, 2009, 2010, 2012). The primary strategy for flood protection has been the construction of embankments, which, by 2012-13, extended to 3,732 km and protected 3.6 million hectares (52.8% of flood-affected areas). A target was set to increase this to 81.2% by constructing an additional 1,555.7 km of embankments by 2017. However, the state has recently shifted focus from embankments to rehabilitating natural drainage systems and allowing rivers more space to flow. The limitations of embankments include blocking the beneficial alluvial sediments, raising riverbeds, and the risk of embankment breaches, leading experts to consider upstream reservoir storage in the Himalayas. However, the feasibility of such storage for flood control is limited, and environmental concerns make large dam construction in the fragile Himalayan ecosystem challenging.

5.1.3 Energy for Agriculture
Bihar faces chronic power deficiencies, with per capita power consumption at only 144 kWh, compared to the national average of 927 kWh. In 2013-14, the state generated only 94 MW and imported 2,241 MW. Agriculture's share of total power sales has decreased from 13.1% in 2009-10 to 6.1% in 2012-13, reflecting poor infrastructure and low electricity usage in agriculture, with only 62 kWh/ha, compared to over 1,000 kWh/ha in more advanced states. The state relies heavily on diesel for irrigation, driving up costs and reducing profitability. Recent initiatives under the Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana and solar pumping programs aim to improve power supply to agriculture, but challenges remain, especially in integrating surplus power back into the grid.

5.1.4 Roads
Rural roads are crucial for agricultural development, reducing transportation costs, and improving market access. Although Bihar's road density is slightly above the national average, only 47.2% of roads are surfaced, compared to much higher percentages in Gujarat, Punjab, and other states. Improving surfaced road density is essential for enhancing the state's agricultural infrastructure.

5.1.5 Procurement System
Bihar's farmers face significant challenges due to inadequate marketing infrastructure, limiting their ability to benefit from the minimum support prices (MSP) provided by the government. The Food Corporation of India's procurement from Bihar is low compared to states like Punjab and Haryana, with only 19.4% of rice and 9.0% of wheat production procured. This low procurement affects farm harvest prices, which often remain below the MSP.

These sections highlight the critical issues and ongoing efforts in Bihar to address the challenges posed by natural disasters, energy deficiencies, poor infrastructure, and limited market access for farmers.

Agriculture Marketing and Storage

The farm harvest price (FHP) of rice and wheat has been significantly lower than the MSP consistently over a long period for both wheat and paddy. It is a matter of concern that the deviation between the FHP and MSP for both paddy and wheat has increased in recent years. The average price difference between the MSP and FHP for the period 2008-09 to 2013-14 for paddy was 22.6 percent and for wheat, 10.2 percent (Figure 24). The low procurement ratio in the state is primarily due to the absence of infrastructure for marketing and, in particular, the lack of storage facilities, which the state is now endeavoring to build.


Agriculture Marketing in Bihar

Bihar took the unique step of repealing the APMC Act in 2006, and at present, there is no legislation regulating agricultural marketing. It was learnt informally from government sources that a new legislation to replace the repealed APMC Act is not under consideration by the state government. Instead, the government is setting up administrative structures to ensure the smooth functioning of markets. There will be an administrator with the rank of district magistrate assisted by a team of officials to oversee the functioning of markets, which have arrangements for food grains, fruits and vegetables, fish, etc.

Kishore, Sharma, and Joshi (2014) highlight that the post-APMC era in Bihar seems to have been a mixed experience for different stakeholders. For farmers, the liberalized regime seems to have been similar to the APMC days. They continue to sell their produce to village aggregators, who take the collected produce to the nearby mandis, keeping farmers isolated from the institutional changes being effected in markets, at least in the short run.

On the other hand, the liberal market environment favors processing industries as they now have increased sourcing options without paying mandi taxes. However, the food processing industry is at a very nascent stage in Bihar, and therefore these benefits are limited. At the national level, only 2 to 3 percent of total fruits and vegetables go through any kind of processing activity. However, for Bihar, food processing is much more important as the high-value segment dominates the agricultural output. Bihar produces around 10 percent of total vegetables in the country and around 5 percent of fruits, yet only 4 percent of total cold storages in India are in Bihar. Of the total 304 cold storages in Bihar, more than 75 percent were exclusively used for potatoes. Worse, a substantial number of cold storages have shut down in the recent past because they have become unviable. The assessment is that cold storages can become viable only if they have multi-product capability. The shortcomings in the quality and quantity of power supply in the state have also contributed to the closure of cold storages.

To bolster cold storage construction, the Bihar Government has initiated a cold storage scheme under which cold storages with a capacity of 5 to 10 thousand tonnes can avail of a subsidy of 30 percent on capital expenditure. For a capacity of more than 10 thousand tonnes, the subsidy can be availed of to the extent of 35 percent. The maximum amount of subsidy is limited to Rs. 5 crore. Cultivation of fruits and vegetables is a risky activity due to high post-harvest losses because of their short shelf life. In order to minimize post-harvest losses, cold storages play an important role. According to a study, post-harvest losses in fruits and vegetables vary from 15-50 percent in Bihar (IL&FS, 2007).

Further, Bihar has ambitious plans to expand storage of food grains, the lack of capacity in which has been identified as one of the main impediments in increasing procurement. The estimated capacity needed is 12.61 lakh metric tonnes, against which 6.98 lakh metric tonnes was in existence at the beginning of the year 2016-17. The plan is to make good the shortfall of 5.63 lakh metric tonnes during 2016-17 and to add a further capacity of 60,000 metric tonnes every year up to 2020-21.


Econometric Analysis

Several supply-side factors influence agricultural growth, such as technology (seed replacement rate, irrigation, fertilizer use, farm mechanization, extension, etc.), incentives (terms of trade), rural infrastructure (electricity, roads), and climatic conditions. However, it is difficult to analyze the effects of all the variables in a single framework, both due to lack of availability of data and the fact that many of these variables can be associated. Therefore, we use a simple model to determine the potential drivers of growth.

Correlation Matrix

It is observed that GDPA shows a significant and positive correlation with irrigation, certified seed use and fertilizer consumption, diversification towards milk, terms of trade, and road density.

Estimating the Equation

The logarithmic value of GDPA is the dependent variable and the variables mentioned above are our explanatory variables. In the analysis, we have used data from 2000-01 to 2012-13 and have run varying specifications of the model by using different variables and have finally presented only those variables that have a significant effect on agriculture GDP. Based on this exercise, the following static models were estimated in Model 1 and Model 2 (Table 36).

 Irrigation, terms of trade, and the milk sector have a significant and positive effect on agriculture’s share in GDP. The three independent variables together explain around 86 percent of the variation in agricultural GDP for the studied period. Since we have estimated a double log model, the results in Model 1 indicate that, ceteris paribus, a one percent growth in the irrigation ratio increases agriculture growth by 1.5 percent. Bihar has substantial potential to increase surface water irrigation. Currently, Bihar has achieved only 53.7 percent of total ultimate potential through major and medium projects and 46.7 percent of minor surface flow irrigation. 

Similarly, Table 36 shows that, all else being equal, a one percent improvement in the terms of trade in favor of agriculture increases agricultural GDP by 0.9 percent. Price policy plays a very important role in driving the agriculture sector. Remunerative prices in the open market help farmers make informed decisions on cropping and also encourage farmers to undertake higher investments. Currently, procurement of food grains from Bihar is low compared to states like Punjab due to poor marketing infrastructure; this has affected the market price of food grains, which is lower than the minimum support prices (MSP). Bihar contributed around 6.1 percent of total rice production in TE 2013-14, but only 3.7 percent of total production was procured by the government (CACP). In comparison, Punjab and Haryana produce around 11 percent and 3.9 percent of total rice production in India respectively, while the government procures around 24.2 percent from Punjab and 7 percent from Haryana. Therefore, it is important that Bihar strengthens its marketing infrastructure and procurement system to levels prevailing in Haryana and Punjab to correct the perpetual bias in procurement and to ensure that farmers in the state can avail of the benefits of the pricing policy (MSP) and increase their ability to incur higher investment and adopt new technologies.

Finally, Model 1 shows that, all else being equal, a one percent increase in the share of milk in the total value of output from agriculture and allied activities will increase agriculture growth by 0.3 percent.

In Model 2, we show that roads and terms of trade in favor of agriculture have a significant and positive effect on agricultural GDP. The two independent variables together explain around 78 percent of the variation in agricultural GDP. As in the case of Model 1, the second model can be interpreted as follows. Ceteris paribus, a one percent growth in road density increases agriculture growth by 1.2 percent and a one percent growth in terms of trade (in favor of agriculture) increases agriculture growth by 0.4 percent. Roads play a very important role in overall agricultural development. It is the only means through which farmers are connected to both output and input markets. However, it is not enough to just increase road density. The government needs to increase surfaced road density, which is only 47.2 percent of total roads in Bihar.

Stationarity and Co-integration

It is important to note that time series data have a common tendency of growing over time. If we ignore this tendency of two or more sequences trending in the same or opposite direction, we can erroneously conclude that changes in one variable are actually caused by changes in another variable. In many cases, two time series processes appear to be correlated only because they are both trending over time for reasons related to other unobserved factors (Wooldridge, 2009). In other words, we need to account for unobserved, trending factors that affect the dependent variable and can also be correlated with the explanatory variables. If we ignore this possibility, we may find a spurious relationship between our

Farm Harvest Price vs. Minimum Support Price

The farm harvest price (FHP) of rice and wheat has been significantly lower than the Minimum Support Price (MSP) consistently over a long period for both wheat and paddy. It is a matter of concern that the deviation between the FHP and MSP for both paddy and wheat has increased in recent years. The average price difference between the MSP and FHP for the period 2008-09 to 2013-14 for paddy was 22.6 percent and for wheat, 10.2 percent (Figure 24). The low procurement ratio in the state is primarily due to the absence of infrastructure for marketing and, in particular, the lack of storage facilities, which the state is now endeavoring to build.

Kishore, Sharma, and Joshi (2014) highlight that the post-APMC era in Bihar seems to have been a mixed experience for different stakeholders. For farmers, the liberalized regime seems to have been similar to the APMC days. They continue to sell their produce to village aggregators, who take the collected produce to the nearby mandis, keeping farmers isolated from the institutional changes being effected in markets, at least in the short run.

On the other hand, the liberal market environment favors processing industries as they now have increased sourcing options without paying mandi taxes. However, the food processing industry is at a very nascent stage in Bihar and therefore these benefits are limited. At the national level, only 2 to 3 percent of total fruits and vegetables go through any kind of processing activity. However, for Bihar, food processing is much more important as the high-value segment dominates the agricultural output. Bihar produces around 10 percent of total vegetables in the country and around 5 percent of fruits, yet only 4 percent of total cold storages in India are in Bihar. Of the total 304 cold storages in Bihar, more than 75 percent were exclusively used for potatoes. Worse, a substantial number of cold storages have shut down in the recent past because they have become unviable. The assessment is that cold storages can become viable only if they have multi-product capability. The shortcomings in the quality and quantity of power supply in the state have also contributed to the closure of cold storages. In order to bolster cold storage construction, the Bihar Government has initiated a cold storage scheme under which cold storages with a capacity of 5 to 10 thousand tonnes can avail of a subsidy of 30 percent on capital expenditure. For a capacity of more than 10 thousand tonnes, the subsidy can be availed of to the extent of 35 percent. The maximum amount of subsidy is limited to Rs. 5 crore. Cultivation of fruits and vegetables is a risky activity due to high post-harvest losses because of their short shelf life. In order to minimize post-harvest losses, cold storages play an important role. According to a study, post-harvest losses in fruits and vegetables vary from 15-50 percent in Bihar (IL&FS, 2007).

Further, Bihar has ambitious plans to expand storage of food grains, the lack of capacity in which has been identified as one of the main impediments in increasing procurement. The estimated capacity needed is 12.61 lakh metric tonnes against which 6.98 lakh metric tonnes were in existence at the beginning of the year 2016-17. The plan is to make good the shortfall of 5.63 lakh metric tonnes during 2016-17 and to add a further capacity of 60,000 metric tonnes every year up to 2020-21.


 
 
 
 

